<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Third Edition, Vol. 8 of 12)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>March 14, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">42336</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="ru"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="ar"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="nl"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="ja"></language>
      <language id="zh"></language>
      <language id="gd"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2013-03-14">March 14, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Magic and Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Social Anthropology in the University of Liverpool</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. VIII. of XII.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Part V: Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. 2 of 2.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1912</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. Ancient Deities of Vegetation as Animals.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Dionysus, the Goat and the Bull.'/>
<head>§ 1. Dionysus, the Goat and the Bull.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ancient
deities of
vegetation
as animals.</note>
However we may explain it, the fact remains that
in peasant folk-lore the corn-spirit is very commonly conceived
and represented in animal form. May not this fact
explain the relation in which certain animals stood to the
ancient deities of vegetation, Dionysus, Demeter, Adonis,
Attis, and Osiris?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dionysus
as a goat:
his association
with
the Pans,
Satyrs, and
Silenuses,
who have
been interpreted
as
semi-goat-shaped
deities of
the woods.</note>
To begin with Dionysus. We have seen that he was
represented sometimes as a goat and sometimes as a bull.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
As a goat he can hardly be separated from the minor
divinities, the Pans, Satyrs, and Silenuses, all of whom are
closely associated with him and are represented more or
less completely in the form of goats. Thus, Pan was
regularly portrayed in sculpture and painting with the face
and legs of a goat.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 46; L. Preller,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. (Berlin,
1894), pp. 745 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; K. Wernicke, in
W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech.
und röm. Mythologie</hi>, iii. 1407 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Satyrs were depicted with pointed
goat-ears, and sometimes with sprouting horns and short
tails.<note place='foot'>L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 600; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 138.</note> They were sometimes spoken of simply as goats;<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 139.</note>
and in the drama their parts were played by men dressed in
goatskins.<note place='foot'>Julius Pollux, iv. 118.</note> Silenus is represented in art clad in a goatskin.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Further, the Fauns, the Italian counterpart of the
Greek Pans and Satyrs, are described as being half goats,
with goat-feet and goat-horns.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, ii. 361, iii. 312, v.
101; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Heroides</hi>, iv. 49.</note> Again, all these minor
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
goat-formed divinities partake more or less clearly of the
character of woodland deities. Thus, Pan was called by the
Arcadians the Lord of the Wood.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> i. 22. 3.</note> The Silenuses associated
with the tree-nymphs.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Aphrodite</hi>, 262
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Fauns are expressly designated
as woodland deities;<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xii. 3; Ovid,
<hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> vi. 392; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 303,
309; Gloss. Isid. Mart. Cap. ii. 167,
cited by W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald-
und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 113.</note> and their character as such is still
further brought out by their association, or even identification,
with Silvanus and the Silvanuses, who, as their name
of itself indicates, are spirits of the woods.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xii. 3; Martianus
Capella, ii. 167; Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate
Dei</hi>, xv. 23; Aurelius Victor, <hi rend='italic'>Origo
gentis Romanae</hi>, iv. 6.</note> Lastly, the
association of the Satyrs with the Silenuses, Fauns, and
Silvanuses,<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Ecl.</hi> vi. 14;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> vi. 392 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Martianus
Capella, ii. 167.</note> proves that the Satyrs also were woodland
deities. These goat-formed spirits of the woods have their
counterparts in the folk-lore of Northern Europe. Thus,
the Russian wood-spirits, called <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign> (from <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>ljes</foreign>, <q>wood</q>)
are believed to appear partly in human shape, but with the
horns, ears, and legs of goats. The <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschi</foreign> can alter his
stature at pleasure; when he walks in the wood he is as tall
as the trees; when he walks in the meadows he is no higher
than the grass. Some of the <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign> are spirits of the corn
as well as of the wood; before harvest they are as tall as
the corn-stalks, but after it they shrink to the height of
the stubble.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>,
p. 145.</note> This brings out&mdash;what we have remarked
before&mdash;the close connexion between tree-spirits and corn-spirits,
and shews how easily the former may melt into the
latter. Similarly the Fauns, though wood-spirits, were believed
to foster the growth of the crops.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 10.</note> We have already
seen how often the corn-spirit is represented in folk-custom
as a goat.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On the whole, then, as Mannhardt argues,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, ch.
iii. pp. 113-211. In the text I have
allowed my former exposition of Mannhardt's
theory as to ancient semi-goat-shaped
spirits of vegetation to stand as
before, but I have done so with hesitation,
because the evidence adduced in
its favour appears to me insufficient to
permit us to speak with any confidence
on the subject. Pan may have been,
as W. H. Roscher and L. R. Farnell
think, nothing more than a herdsman's
god, the semi-human, semi-bestial representative
of goats in particular. See W.
H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und
röm. Mythologie</hi>, iii. 1405 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. R.
Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>,
v. (Oxford, 1909) pp. 431 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> And
the Satyrs and Silenuses seem to have
more affinity with horses than with
goats. See W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon
der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>, iv.
444 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
the Pans, Satyrs, and Fauns perhaps belong to a widely
diffused class of wood-spirits conceived in goat-form. The
fondness of goats for straying in woods and nibbling the
bark of trees, to which indeed they are most destructive,
is an obvious and perhaps sufficient reason why wood-spirits
should so often be supposed to take the form of
goats. The inconsistency of a god of vegetation subsisting
upon the vegetation which he personifies is not one to
strike the primitive mind. Such inconsistencies arise when
the deity, ceasing to be immanent in the vegetation, comes
to be regarded as its owner or lord; for the idea of owning
the vegetation naturally leads to that of subsisting on it.
We have already seen that the corn-spirit, originally conceived
as immanent in the corn, afterwards comes to be
regarded as its owner, who lives on it and is reduced to
poverty and want by being deprived of it.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wood-spirits
in
the form of
goats.</note>
Thus the representation of wood-spirits in the form of
goats appears to be both widespread and, to the primitive
mind, natural. Therefore when we find, as we have done,
that Dionysus&mdash;a tree-god&mdash;is sometimes represented in
goat-form,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> we can hardly avoid concluding that this representation
is simply a part of his proper character as a tree-god
and is not to be explained by the fusion of two distinct
and independent worships, in one of which he originally
appeared as a tree-god and in the other as a goat. If such
a fusion took place in the case of Dionysus, it must equally
have taken place in the case of the Pans and Satyrs of
Greece, the Fauns of Italy, and the <foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign> of Russia.
That such a fusion of two wholly disconnected worships
should have occurred once is possible; that it should have
occurred twice independently is improbable; that it should
have occurred thrice independently is so unlikely as to be
practically incredible.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The bull as
an embodiment
of
Dionysus
seems to be
another expression
of
his character
as a god
of vegetation.</note>
Dionysus was also figured, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> in the shape
of a bull. After what has gone before we are naturally led
to expect that his bull form must have been only another
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
expression for his character as a deity of vegetation, especially
as the bull is a common embodiment of the corn-spirit in
Northern Europe;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and the close association of Dionysus
with Demeter and Persephone in the mysteries of Eleusis
shews that he had at least strong agricultural affinities.
The other possible explanation of the bull-shaped Dionysus
would be that the conception of him as a bull was originally
entirely distinct from the conception of him as a deity of
vegetation, and that the fusion of the two conceptions was
due to some such circumstance as the union of two tribes,
one of which had previously worshipped a bull-god and the
other a tree-god. This appears to be the view taken by
Mr. Andrew Lang, who suggests that the bull-formed
Dionysus <q>had either been developed out of, or had succeeded
to, the worship of a bull-totem.</q><note place='foot'>A. Lang, <hi rend='italic'>Myth, Ritual, and
Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> ii. 252.</note> Of course this is
possible. But it is not yet certain that the Aryans ever had
totemism.<note place='foot'>Compare <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>,
iv. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On the other hand, it is quite certain that many
Aryan peoples have conceived deities of vegetation as
embodied in animal forms. Therefore when we find
amongst an Aryan people like the Greeks a deity of
vegetation represented as an animal, the presumption must
be in favour of explaining this by a principle which is
certainly known to have influenced the Aryan race rather
than by one which is not certainly known to have done so.
In the present state of our knowledge, therefore, it is safer
to regard the bull form of Dionysus as being, like his goat
form, an expression of his proper character as a deity of
vegetation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>,
an
Athenian
sacrifice of
an ox to
Zeus
Polieus.</note>
The probability of this view will be somewhat increased
if it can be shewn that in other rites than those of Dionysus
the ancients slew an ox as a representative of the spirit of
vegetation. This they appear to have done in the Athenian
sacrifice known as <q>the murder of the ox</q> (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>). It
took place about the end of June or beginning of July, that
is, about the time when the threshing is nearly over in
Attica. According to tradition the sacrifice was instituted
to procure a cessation of drought and dearth which had
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
afflicted the land. The ritual was as follows. Barley mixed
with wheat, or cakes made of them, were laid upon the bronze
altar of Zeus Polieus on the Acropolis. Oxen were driven
round the altar, and the ox which went up to the altar and
ate the offering on it was sacrificed. The axe and knife
with which the beast was slain had been previously wetted
with water brought by maidens called <q>water-carriers.</q> The
weapons were then sharpened and handed to the butchers,
one of whom felled the ox with the axe and another cut its
throat with the knife. As soon as he had felled the ox, the
former threw the axe from him and fled; and the man who
cut the beast's throat apparently imitated his example.
Meantime the ox was skinned and all present partook of
its flesh. Then the hide was stuffed with straw and sewed
up; next the stuffed animal was set on its feet and yoked
to a plough as if it were ploughing. A trial then took place
in an ancient law-court presided over by the King (as he
was called) to determine who had murdered the ox. The
maidens who had brought the water accused the men who
had sharpened the axe and knife; the men who had sharpened
the axe and knife blamed the men who had handed
these implements to the butchers; the men who had handed
the implements to the butchers blamed the butchers; and the
butchers laid the blame on the axe and knife, which were
accordingly found guilty, condemned and cast into the sea.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 24. 4; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, i. 28. 10;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Var. Hist.</hi> viii. 3; Scholia on
Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Peace</hi>, 419, and <hi rend='italic'>Clouds</hi>,
985; Hesychius, Suidas, and <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum
Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> βούφονια; Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
Θαύλων; Im. Bekker's <hi rend='italic'>Anecdota Graeca</hi>
(Berlin, 1814-1821), p. 238, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
Δυπόλια. The date of the sacrifice (14th
Skirophorion) is given by the Scholiast
on Aristophanes and the <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum
Magnum</hi>; and this date corresponds,
according to W. Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 68), with the
close of the threshing in Attica. No
writer mentions the trial of both the
axe and the knife. Pausanias speaks
of the trial of the axe, Porphyry and
Aelian of the trial of the knife. But
from Porphyry's description it is clear
that the slaughter was carried out by
two men, one wielding an axe and the
other a knife, and that the former laid
the blame on the latter. Perhaps the
knife alone was condemned. That the
King (as to whom see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)
presided at the trial of all lifeless objects,
is mentioned by Aristotle (<hi rend='italic'>Constitution
of Athens</hi>, 57) and Julius Pollux (viii.
90, compare viii. 120).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ox
sacrificed
at the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>
appears to
have embodied
the
corn-spirit.</note>
The name of this sacrifice,&mdash;<q>the <emph>murder</emph> of the ox,</q><note place='foot'>The real import of the name
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign> was first perceived by W.
Robertson Smith. See his <hi rend='italic'>Religion of
the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In Cos
also an ox specially chosen was
sacrificed to Zeus Polieus. See
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 616; Ch. Michel,
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</hi>, No.
716; H. Collitz und F. Bechtel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften</hi>,
iii. pp. 357 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No.
3636; J. de Prott et L. Ziehen, <hi rend='italic'>Leges
Graecorum Sacrae e Titulis collectae</hi>,
Fasciculus i. (Leipsic, 1896) pp. 19
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No. 5; M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische
Feste</hi> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 17-21.
A month Bouphonion, corresponding
to the Attic Boedromion (September),
occurred in the calendars of Delos and
Tenos. See E. Bischoff, <q>De fastis
Graecorum antiquioribus,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Leipziger
Studien für classische Philologie</hi>, vii.
(Leipsic, 1884) p. 414.</note>&mdash;the
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
pains taken by each person who had a hand in the
slaughter to lay the blame on some one else, together with
the formal trial and punishment of the axe or knife or both,
prove that the ox was here regarded not merely as a victim
offered to a god, but as itself a sacred creature, the slaughter
of which was sacrilege or murder. This is borne out by a
statement of Varro that to kill an ox was formerly a capital
crime in Attica.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, ii. 5. 4.
Compare Columella, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, vi.
praef. § 7. Perhaps, however, Varro's
statement may be merely an inference
drawn from the ritual of the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>
and the legend told to explain it.</note> The mode of selecting the victim suggests
that the ox which tasted the corn was viewed as the corn-deity
taking possession of his own. This interpretation is
supported by the following custom. In Beauce, in the district
of Orleans, on the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth of April they
make a straw-man called <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign>.</q> For they say
that the old <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign> is now dead and it is necessary to make
a new one. The straw-man is carried in solemn procession
up and down the village and at last is placed upon the
oldest apple-tree. There he remains till the apples are
gathered, when he is taken down and thrown into the water,
or he is burned and his ashes cast into water. But the
person who plucks the first fruit from the tree succeeds to
the title of <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign>,</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
409.</note> Here the straw figure,
called <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign></q> and placed on the oldest apple-tree
in spring, represents the spirit of the tree, who, dead in
winter, revives when the apple-blossoms appear on the boughs.
Thus the person who plucks the first fruit from the tree
and thereby receives the name of <q>the great <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mondard</foreign></q>
must be regarded as a representative of the tree-spirit.
Primitive peoples are usually reluctant to taste the annual
first-fruits of any crop, until some ceremony has been performed
which makes it safe and pious for them to do so.
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
The reason of this reluctance appears to be a belief that the
first-fruits either belong to or actually contain a divinity.
Therefore when a man or animal is seen boldly to appropriate
the sacred first-fruits, he or it is naturally regarded
as the divinity himself in human or animal form taking
possession of his own. The time of the Athenian sacrifice,
which fell about the close of the threshing, suggests that the
wheat and barley laid upon the altar were a harvest offering;
and the sacramental character of the subsequent repast&mdash;all
partaking of the flesh of the divine animal&mdash;would
make it parallel to the harvest-suppers of modern Europe,
in which, as we have seen, the flesh of the animal who stands
for the corn-spirit is eaten by the harvesters. Again, the
tradition that the sacrifice was instituted in order to put an
end to drought and famine is in favour of taking it as a
harvest festival. The resurrection of the corn-spirit, enacted
by setting up the stuffed ox and yoking it to the plough,
may be compared with the resurrection of the tree-spirit in
the person of his representative, the Wild Man.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 208.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice of
an ox to
Zeus Sosipolis
at
Magnesia
on the
Maeander. The bull so
sacrificed
seems to
have been
regarded as
an embodiment
of the
corn-spirit.</note>
Still more clearly, perhaps, does the identification of the
corn-spirit with an ox come out in the sacrificial ritual which
the Greeks of Magnesia on the Maeander observed in honour
of Zeus Sosipolis, a god whose title of Sosipolis (<q>Saviour
of the City</q>) marks him as the equivalent of Zeus Polieus
(<q>Zeus of the City</q>). The details of the ritual are happily
preserved in an inscription, which records a decree of the
council and of the people for the regulation of the whole
proceedings. Every year at a festival in the month of
Heraeon the magistrates bought the finest bull that could
be had for money, and at the new moon of the month of
Cronion, at the time when the sowing was about to begin,
they and the priests dedicated the animal to Zeus Sosipolis,
while solemn prayers were offered by the voice of a sacred
herald for the welfare of the city, of the land, and of the
people, for peace and wealth, for the corn-crops and all
other fruits, and for the cattle. Thereafter the sacred
animal was kept throughout the winter, its keep being
undertaken by a contractor, who was bound by law to drive
the bull to the market and there collect contributions for its
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
maintenance from all the hucksters and in particular from
the corn-chandlers; and a prospect was held out to such as
contributed that it would go well with them. Finally, after
having been thus maintained at the public cost for some months,
the bull was led forth with great pomp and sacrificed in the
market-place on the twelfth day of the month Artemision,
which is believed to have been equivalent to the Attic
month of Thargelion and to the English month of May,
the season when the corn is reaped in the Greek lowlands.
In the procession which attended the animal to the place of
sacrifice the senators, the priests, the magistrates, the young
people, and the victors in the games all bore a part, and at
the head of the procession were borne the images of the
Twelve Gods attired in festal array, while a fluteplayer, a
piper, and a harper discoursed solemn music.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1898-1901),
vol. ii. pp. 246-248, No. 553.
As to the identification of the Magnesian
month Artemision with the
Attic month Thargelion (May), see
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 242, No.
552 note 4. It is interesting to observe
that at Magnesia the sowing took place
in Cronion, the month of Cronus, a
god whom the ancients regularly identified
with Saturn, the Italian god of
sowing. In Samos, Perinthus, and
Patmos, however, the month Cronion
seems to have been equivalent to the
Attic Scirophorion, a month corresponding
to June or July, which could
never have been a season of sowing in
the hot rainless summers of Greece.
See E. Bischoff, <q>De fastis Graecarum
antiquioribus,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Leipziger Studien
für classische Philologie</hi>, vii. (1884) p.
400; Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 645 note 14,
vol. ii. p. 449.</note> Now in
the bull, which was thus dedicated at the time of sowing
and kept at the cost of the pious, and especially of corn-chandlers,
to be finally sacrificed at harvest, it is reasonable
to see an embodiment of the corn-spirit. Regarded as such
the animal was consecrated when the seed was committed
to the earth; it was fed and kept all the time the corn was
growing in order that by its beneficent energies it might
foster that growth; and at last, to complete the parallel,
when the corn was reaped the animal was slain, the cutting
of the stalks being regarded as the death of the corn-spirit.<note place='foot'>In thus interpreting the sacrifice
of the bull at Magnesia I follow the
excellent exposition of Professor M. P.
Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi> (Leipsic,
1906), pp. 23-27.</note>
Similarly we have seen that in the harvest-fields and on
the threshing-floors of modern Europe the corn-spirit is
often conceived in the form of a bull, an ox, or a calf,
which is supposed to be killed at reaping or threshing; and,
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
further, we saw that the conception is sometimes carried out
in practice by slaughtering a real ox or a real calf on the
harvest-field. Thus the parallelism between the ancient
Greek and the modern European idea of the corn-spirit
embodied in the form of a bull appears to be very close.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Greek
conception
of the corn-spirit
as
both male
and female.</note>
On the interpretation which I have adopted of the
sacrifices offered to Zeus Polieus and Zeus Sosipolis the
corn-spirit is conceived as a male, not as a female, as Zeus,
not as Demeter or Persephone. In this there is no inconsistency.
At the stage of thought which the Greeks had
reached long before the dawn of history they supposed
the processes of reproduction in nature to be carried on
by a male and a female principle in conjunction; they did
not believe, like some backward savages, that the female
principle alone suffices for that purpose, and that the aid of
the male principle is superfluous. Hence, as we have seen,
they imagined that the goddesses of the corn, the mother
Demeter and the daughter Persephone, had each her male
partner with whom she united for the production of the
crops. The partner of Demeter was Zeus, the partner of
Persephone was his brother Pluto, the Subterranean Zeus,
as he was called; and reasons have been shewn for thinking
that the marriage of one or other of these divine pairs was
solemnised at Eleusis as part of the Great Mysteries in
order to promote the growth of the corn.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ox as a
representative
of the
corn-spirit
at Great
Bassam in
Guinea.</note>
The ox appears as a representative of the corn-spirit
in other parts of the world. At Great Bassam, in Guinea,
two oxen are slain annually to procure a good harvest.
If the sacrifice is to be effectual, it is necessary that the
oxen should weep. So all the women of the village sit in
front of the beasts, chanting, <q>The ox will weep; yes, he
will weep!</q> From time to time one of the women walks
round the beasts, throwing manioc meal or palm wine upon
them, especially into their eyes. When tears roll down from
the eyes of the oxen, the people dance, singing, <q>The ox
weeps! the ox weeps!</q> Then two men seize the tails of
the beasts and cut them off at one blow. It is believed that
a great misfortune will happen in the course of the year if
the tails are not severed at one blow. The oxen are afterwards
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
killed, and their flesh is eaten by the chiefs.<note place='foot'>H. Hecquard, <hi rend='italic'>Reise an die Küste
und in das Innere von West-Afrika</hi>
(Leipsic, 1854), pp. 41-43.</note> Here
the tears of the oxen, like those of the human victims
amongst the Khonds and the Aztecs,<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 248.</note> are probably a rain-charm.
We have already seen that the virtue of the corn-spirit,
embodied in animal form, is sometimes supposed to
reside in the tail, and that the last handful of corn is sometimes
conceived as the tail of the corn spirit.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 268, 272.</note> In the
Mithraic religion this conception is graphically set forth in
some of the numerous sculptures which represent Mithras
kneeling on the back of a bull and plunging a knife into its
flank; for on certain of these monuments the tail of the
bull ends in three stalks of corn, and in one of them corn-stalks
instead of blood are seen issuing from the wound
inflicted by the knife.<note place='foot'>Franz Cumont, <hi rend='italic'>Textes et Monuments
figurés relatifs aux Mystères de
Mithra</hi> (Brussels, 1896-1899), ii.
figures 18, 19, 20, 59 (p. 228, corn-stalks
issuing from wound), 67, 70, 78,
87, 105, 143, 168, 215, also plates v.
and vi.</note> Such representations certainly
suggest that the bull, whose sacrifice appears to have
formed a leading feature in the Mithraic ritual, was conceived,
in one at least of its aspects, as an incarnation of
the corn-spirit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ox as
a personification
of
the corn-spirit
in
China.</note>
Still more clearly does the ox appear as a personification
of the corn-spirit in a ceremony which is observed in all the
provinces and districts of China to welcome the approach of
spring. On the first day of spring, usually on the third or
fourth of February, which is also the beginning of the Chinese
New Year, the governor or prefect of the city goes in procession
to the east gate of the city, and sacrifices to the Divine
Husbandman, who is represented with a bull's head on the
body of a man. A large effigy of an ox, cow, or buffalo has
been prepared for the occasion, and stands outside of the
east gate, with agricultural implements beside it. The
figure is made of differently-coloured pieces of paper pasted
on a framework either by a blind man or according to the
directions of a necromancer. The colours of the paper
prognosticate the character of the coming year; if red
prevails, there will be many fires; if white, there will be
floods and rain; and so with the other colours. The
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
mandarins walk slowly round the ox, beating it severely at
each step with rods of various hues. It is filled with five
kinds of grain, which pour forth when the effigy is broken
by the blows of the rods. The paper fragments are then
set on fire, and a scramble takes place for the burning fragments,
because the people believe that whoever gets one of
them is sure to be fortunate throughout the year. A live
buffalo is next killed, and its flesh is divided among the
mandarins. According to one account, the effigy of the ox
is made of clay, and, after being beaten by the governor, is
stoned by the people till they break it in pieces, <q>from
which they expect an abundant year.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>China Review</hi>, i. (July 1872 to June
1873, Hongkong), pp. 62, 154, 162,
203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rev. J. Doolittle, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life
of the Chinese</hi>, ed. Paxton Hood (London,
1868), pp. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Rev. J. H.
Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi> (London, 1878), ii. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But the ceremony
varies somewhat in the different provinces. According to
another account the effigy of the cow, made of earthenware,
with gilded horns, is borne in procession, and is of such
colossal dimensions that forty or fifty men can hardly carry
it. Behind this monstrous cow walks a boy with one foot
shod and the other bare, personifying the Genius of Industry.
He beats the effigy with a rod, as if to drive it forward. A
great many little clay cows are afterwards taken out of the
large one and distributed among the people. Both the big
cow and the little ones are then broken in pieces, and the
people take the sherds home with them in order to grind
them to powder and strew the powder on their fields, for
they think thus to secure a plentiful harvest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ostasiatischer Lloyd</hi>, March 14,
1890, quoted by J. D. E. Schmeltz,
<q>Das Pflugfest in China,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
xi. (1898) p. 79. With this account
the one given by S. W. Williams (<hi rend='italic'>The
Middle Kingdom</hi>, New York and
London, 1848, ii. 109) substantially
agrees. In many districts, according
to the <hi rend='italic'>Ostasiatischer Lloyd</hi>, the Genius
of Spring is represented at this festival
by a boy of blameless character, clad
in green. As to the custom of going
with one foot bare and the other shod,
see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>,
pp. 311-313.</note> In the cities
nearest to Weihaiwei, in northern China, the ceremony of <q>the
Beginning of Spring</q> is a moveable feast, which falls usually
in the first moon. The local magistrate and his attendants
go in procession to the eastern suburbs of the city to <q>meet
the Spring.</q> A great pasteboard effigy of an ox is carried
in the procession, together with another pasteboard image
of a man called Mang-Shen, <q>who represents either the
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
typical ox-driver or ploughman or the god of Agriculture.</q>
On the return of the procession to the magistrate's court,
that dignitary himself and his principal colleagues beat and
prod the pasteboard ox with wands, after which the effigy
is burned along with the image of its attendant. The
colours and apparel of the two effigies correspond with the
forecasts of the Chinese almanack. Thus if the head of the
ox is yellow, the summer will be very hot; if it is green,
the spring will be sickly; if it is red, there will be a
drought; if it is black, there will be much rain; if it is
white, there will be high winds. If Mang-Shen wears a hat,
the year will be dry; if he is bareheaded, it will be rainy;
and so on with the other articles of his apparel. Besides
the pasteboard ox a miniature ox made of clay is also
supposed to be provided.<note place='foot'>R. F. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>Lion and Dragon
in Northern China</hi> (London, 1910),
pp. 180-182.</note> In Chinese the ceremony is
called indifferently <q>beating the ox</q> and <q>beating the
spring,</q> which seems to prove that the ox is identified with
the vernal energies of nature. We may suppose that originally
the ox which figures in the rite was a living animal, but
ever since the beginning of our era, when the custom first
appears in history, it has been an effigy of terra-cotta or
pasteboard. To this day the Chinese calendar devotes a
page to a picture of <q>the ox of spring</q> with Mang, the
tutelary genius of spring, standing beside it and grasping a
willow-bough, with which he is about to beat the animal for
the purpose of stimulating its reproductive virtue.<note place='foot'>Ed. Chavannes, <hi rend='italic'>Le T'ai Chan,
Essai de Monographie d'un Culte
Chinois</hi> (Paris, 1910), p. 500 (<hi rend='italic'>Annales
du Musée Guimet, Bibliothèque
d'Études</hi>, vol. xxi.).</note> In one
form of this Chinese custom the corn-spirit appears to be
plainly represented by the corn-filled ox, whose fragments
may therefore be supposed to bring fertility with them. We
may compare the Silesian custom of burning the effigy of
Death, scrambling for the burning fragments, and burying
them in the fields to secure a good crop, and the Florentine
custom of sawing the Old Woman and scrambling for the
dried fruits with which she was filled.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 240 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
250.</note> Both these customs,
like their Chinese counterpart, are observed in spring.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ox as
a personification
of
the corn-spirit
in
Kashgar
and
Annam.</note>The practice of beating an earthenware or pasteboard
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
image of an ox in spring is not confined to China proper,
but seems to be widely spread in the east of Asia; for example,
it has been recorded at Kashgar and in Annam.
Thus a French traveller has described how at Kashgar,
on the third of February 1892, a mandarin, clad in his
finest robes and borne in a magnificent palanquin, conducted
solemnly through the streets the pasteboard image of an ox,
<q>a sacred animal devoted to the deity of spring who gives
life to the fields. It is thus carried to some distance outside
of the town on the eastern side. The official who acts as
pontiff ceremoniously offers food and libations to it in order
to obtain a fruitful year, and next day it is demolished by
the lashes of a whip.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. Dutreuil de Rhins, <hi rend='italic'>Mission
Scientifique dans la Haute Asie, 1890-1895</hi>,
i. (Paris, 1897) pp. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> After
describing the ceremony as he witnessed
it at Kashgar, the writer adds:
<q>Probably the ox was at first a living
animal which they sacrificed and distributed
the flesh to the bystanders.
At the present day the official who
acts as pontiff has a number of small
pasteboard oxen made, which he sends
to the notables in order that they may
participate intimately in the sacrifice,
which is more than symbolical. The
reason for carrying the ox a long
distance is that as much as possible of
the territory may be sanctified by the
passage of the sacred animal, and that
as many people as possible may share
in the sacrifice, at least with their eyes
and good wishes. The procession,
which begins very early in the morning,
moves eastward, that is, toward
the quarter where, the winter being
now over, the first sun of spring may
be expected to appear, whose divinity
the ceremony is intended to render
propitious. It is needless to insist on
the analogy between this Chinese festival
and our Carnival, at which, about
the same season, a fat ox is led about.
Both festivals have their origin in the
same conceptions of ancient natural
religion.</q></note> Again, in Annam, every year at
the approach of spring the Department of Rites publishes
instructions to the provincial governors as to the manner in
which the festival of the inauguration of spring is to be celebrated.
Among the indispensable features of the festival
are the figures of an ox and its warder made of terra-cotta.
The attitudes of the two and the colours to be applied to
them are carefully prescribed every year in the Chinese
calendar. Popular opinion attributes to the colour of the ox
and the accoutrement of its warder, who is called Mang
Than, a certain influence on the crops of the year: a green,
yellow, and black buffalo prognosticates an abundant harvest:
a red or white buffalo foretells wretched crops and great
droughts or hurricanes. If Mang Than is represented wearing
a large hat, the year will be rainy; if on the other hand
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
he is bareheaded, long barren droughts are to be feared.
Nay, the public credulity goes so far as to draw good or evil
omens from the cheerfulness or ill humour which may be
detected on the features of the Warder of the Ox. Having
been duly prepared in accordance with the directions of the
almanack, the ox and its warder are carried in procession,
followed by the mandarins and the people, to the altar of
Spring, which is usually to be found in every provincial
capital. There the provincial governor offers fruits, flowers,
and incense to the Genius of Spring (<foreign lang='zh' rend='italic'>Xuan Quan</foreign>), and gold
and silver paper money are burnt on the altar in profusion.
Lastly the ox and his warder are buried in a spot which has
been indicated by a geomancer.<note place='foot'>Colonel E. Diguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Annamites,
Société, Coutumes, Religions</hi> (Paris,
1906), pp. 250-253.</note> It is interesting to observe
that the three colours of the ox which are taken to prognosticate
good crops, to wit, green, yellow, and black, are
precisely the colours which the ancients attributed to Demeter,
the goddess of the corn.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, and
below, pp. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual inauguration
of ploughing
by the
Chinese
emperor.</note>
The great importance which the Chinese attach to the
performance of rites for the fertility of the ground is proved
by an ancient custom which is, or was till lately, observed
every year in spring. On an appointed day the emperor
himself, attended by the highest dignitaries of the state,
guides with his own hand the ox-drawn plough down
several furrows and scatters the seed in a sacred field, or
<q>field of God,</q> as it is called, the produce of which is
afterwards examined from time to time with anxious care
by the Governor of Peking, who draws omens from the
appearance of the ears; it is a very happy omen if he
should chance to find thirteen ears growing on one stalk.
To prepare himself for the celebration of this solemn rite
the emperor is expected to fast and remain continent for
three days previously, and the princes and mandarins who
accompany him to the field are bound to observe similar
restrictions. The corn grown on the holy field which has
thus been ploughed by the imperial hands is collected in
yellow sacks and stored in a special granary to be used by the
emperor in certain solemn sacrifices which he offers to the god
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
Chan Ti and to his own ancestors. In the provinces of
China the season of ploughing is similarly inaugurated by
the provincial governors as representatives of the emperor.<note place='foot'>Du Halde, <hi rend='italic'>The General History of
China</hi>, Third Edition (London, 1741),
ii. 120-122; Huc, <hi rend='italic'>L'Empire Chinois</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>
(Paris, 1879), ii. 338-343; Rev. J. H.
Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi> (London, 1878), ii. 116-118.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Sacred Books of
China</hi>, translated by James Legge,
Part iii., <hi rend='italic'>The Lî Kî</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of
the East</hi>, vol. xxvii., Oxford, 1885),
pp. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>In this month [the first
month of spring] the son of Heaven
on the first day prays to God for a
good year; and afterwards, the day of
the first conjunction of the sun and
moon having been chosen, with the
handle and share of the plough in the
carriage, placed between the man-at-arms
who is its third occupant and the
driver, he conducts his three ducal
ministers, his nine high ministers, the
feudal princes and his Great officers, all
with their own hands to plough the
field of God. The son of Heaven
turns up three furrows, each of the
ducal ministers five, and the other
ministers and feudal princes nine.
When they return, he takes in his
hand a cup in the great chamber, all
the others being in attendance on him
and the Great officers, and says, <q>Drink
this cup of comfort after your toil.</q> In
this month the vapours of heaven
descend and those of the earth ascend.
Heaven and earth are in harmonious
co-operation. All plants bud and
grow.</q> Here the selection of a day
in spring when sun and moon are in
conjunction is significant. Such conjunctions
are regarded as marriages of
the great luminaries and therefore as
the proper seasons for the celebration
of rites designed to promote fertility.
See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 73.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy
of the
Chinese
custom to
the agricultural
rites
at Eleusis
and elsewhere.</note>
The sacred field, or <q>field of God,</q> in which the emperor
of China thus ceremonially opens the ploughing for the year,
and of which the produce is employed in sacrifice, reminds
us of the Rarian plain at Eleusis, in which a sacred ploughing
similarly took place every year, and of which the produce
was in like manner devoted to sacrifice.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. 74, 108.</note> Further, it recalls
the little sacred rice-fields on which the Kayans of central
Borneo inaugurate the various operations of the agricultural
year by performing them in miniature.<note place='foot'>See above, p. 93.</note> As I have already
pointed out, all such consecrated enclosures were probably
in origin what we may call spiritual preserves, that is,
patches of ground which men set apart for the exclusive use
of the corn-spirit to console him for the depredations they
committed on all the rest of his domains. Again, the rule
of fasting and continence observed by the Emperor of China
and his august colleagues before they put their hands to the
plough resembles the similar customs of abstinence practised
by many savages as a preparation for engaging in the various
labours of the field.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. 94, 109; <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>,
ii. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rending
of live
animals in
the rites of
Dionysus.</note>
On the whole we may perhaps conclude that both as a
goat and as a bull Dionysus was essentially a god of vegetation.
The Chinese and European customs which I have
cited<note place='foot'>As to the European customs, see
above, p. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</note> may perhaps shed light on the custom of rending
a live bull or goat at the rites of Dionysus. The animal
was torn in fragments, as the Khond victim was cut in
pieces, in order that the worshippers might each secure a
portion of the life-giving and fertilising influence of the god.
The flesh was eaten raw as a sacrament, and we may conjecture
that some of it was taken home to be buried in the
fields, or otherwise employed so as to convey to the fruits of
the earth the quickening influence of the god of vegetation.
The resurrection of Dionysus, related in his myth, may have
been enacted in his rites by stuffing and setting up the slain
ox, as was done at the Athenian <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Demeter, the Pig and the Horse.'/>
<head>§ 2. Demeter, the Pig and the Horse.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Association
of the pig
with
Demeter. Pigs in the
ritual of
the Thesmophoria. The sacred
serpent at
Lanuvium.</note>
Passing next to the corn-goddess Demeter, and remembering
that in European folk-lore the pig is a common
embodiment of the corn-spirit,<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> we may now ask whether
the pig, which was so closely associated with Demeter, may
not have been originally the goddess herself in animal form?
The pig was sacred to her;<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Acharn.</hi>
747.</note> in art she was portrayed
carrying or accompanied by a pig;<note place='foot'>J. Overbeck, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Kunstmythologie</hi>,
Besonderer Theil, ii. (Leipsic,
1873-1878), p. 493; Müller-Wieseler,
<hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der alten Kunst</hi>,
ii. pl. viii. 94.</note> and the pig was
regularly sacrificed in her mysteries, the reason assigned
being that the pig injures the corn and is therefore an
enemy of the goddess.<note place='foot'>Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 277; Cornutus,
<hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>, 28;
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 23; Scholiast
on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Acharn.</hi> 747; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
on <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 338; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, on <hi rend='italic'>Peace</hi>, 374;
Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> ii. 380;
Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> x. 16.</note> But after an animal has been
conceived as a god, or a god as an animal, it sometimes
happens, as we have seen, that the god sloughs off his
animal form and becomes purely anthropomorphic; and
that then the animal, which at first had been slain in the
character of the god, comes to be viewed as a victim offered
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
to the god on the ground of its hostility to the deity; in
short, the god is sacrificed to himself on the ground that
he is his own enemy. This happened to Dionysus,<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and
it may have happened to Demeter also. And in fact the
rites of one of her festivals, the Thesmophoria, bear out the
view that originally the pig was an embodiment of the
corn-goddess herself, either Demeter or her daughter and
double Persephone. The Attic Thesmophoria was an
autumn festival, celebrated by women alone in October,<note place='foot'>As to the Thesmophoria see my
article <q>Thesmophoria</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>, Ninth Edition, vol.
xxiii, 295 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste
der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), pp. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss J. E. Harisson,
<hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Cambridge, 1908), pp. 120
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R.
Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>,
iii. (Oxford, 1907) pp. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> At
Thebes and in Delos the Thesmophoria
was held in summer, in the month of
Metageitnion (August). See Xenophon,
<hi rend='italic'>Hellenica</hi>, v. 2. 29; M. P. Nilsson
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>, pp. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
and appears to have represented with mourning rites the
descent of Persephone (or Demeter)<note place='foot'>Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> στήνια, speaks
of the ascent of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Demeter</foreign> from the lower
world; and Clement of Alexandria
speaks of both Demeter and Persephone
as having been engulfed in the chasm
(<hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 17). The original equivalence
of Demeter and Persephone
must be borne steadily in mind.</note> into the lower world,
and with joy her return from the dead.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 69;
Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> στήνια.</note> Hence the name
Descent or Ascent variously applied to the first, and the
name <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Kalligeneia</foreign> (fair-born) applied to the third day of the
festival. Now from an old scholium on Lucian<note place='foot'>E. Rohde, <q>Unedirte Lucians-scholien,
die attischen Thesmophorien
und Haloen betreffend,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches
Museum</hi>, N.F., xxv. (1870) p. 548;
<hi rend='italic'>Scholia in Lucianum</hi>, ed. H. Rabe
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Two passages
of classical writers (Clement
of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 17, and
Pausanias, ix. 8. 1) refer to the rites
described by the scholiast on Lucian,
and had been rightly interpreted by
Chr. A. Lobeck (<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, pp.
827 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) before the discovery of the
scholia.</note> we learn
some details about the mode of celebrating the Thesmophoria,
which shed important light on the part of the
festival called the Descent or the Ascent. The scholiast
tells us that it was customary at the Thesmophoria to throw
pigs, cakes of dough, and branches of pine-trees into <q>the
chasms of Demeter and Persephone,</q> which appear to have
been sacred caverns or vaults.<note place='foot'>The scholiast speaks of them as
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>megara</foreign> and <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>adyta</foreign>. The name <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>megara</foreign>
is thought to be derived from a Phoenician
word meaning <q>cavern,</q> <q>subterranean
chasm,</q> the Hebrew מעךה.
See F. C. Moyers, <hi rend='italic'>Die Phoenizier</hi>
(Bonn, 1841), i. 220. In Greek
usage the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>megara</foreign> were properly
subterranean vaults or chasms sacred to
the gods. See Hesychius, quoted by
Movers, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> (the passage does not
appear in M. Schmidt's minor edition
of Hesychius); Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De antro
nympharum</hi>, 6; and my note on
Pausanias, ii. 2. 1.</note> In these caverns or vaults
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
there were said to be serpents, which guarded the caverns
and consumed most of the flesh of the pigs and dough-cakes
which were thrown in. Afterwards&mdash;apparently at the next
annual festival<note place='foot'>We infer this from Pausanias, ix.
8. 1, though the passage is incomplete
and apparently corrupt. For ἐν Δωδώνῃ
Lobeck (<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, pp. 829 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)
proposed to read ἀναδῦναι or ἀναδοθῆαι.
At the spring and autumn festivals of
Isis at Tithorea geese and goats were
thrown into the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>adyton</foreign> and left there
till the following festival, when the
remains were removed and buried at a
certain spot a little way from the temple.
See Pausanias, x. 32. 14. This analogy
supports the view that the pigs thrown
into the caverns at the Thesmophoria
were left there till the next festival.</note>&mdash;the decayed remains of the pigs, the cakes,
and the pine-branches were fetched by women called
<q>drawers,</q> who, after observing rules of ceremonial purity
for three days, descended into the caverns, and, frightening
away the serpents by clapping their hands, brought up the
remains and placed them on the altar. Whoever got a
piece of the decayed flesh and cakes, and sowed it with the
seed-corn in his field, was believed to be sure of a good crop.
With the feeding of the serpents in the vaults by the
women we may compare an ancient Italian ritual. At
Lanuvium a serpent lived in a sacred cave within a grove
of Juno. On certain appointed days a number of holy
maidens, with their eyes bandaged, entered the grove
carrying cakes of barley in their hands. Led, as it was
believed, by the divine spirit, they walked straight to the
serpent's den and offered him the cakes. If they were
chaste, the serpent ate the cakes, the parents of the girls
rejoiced, and farmers prognosticated an abundant harvest.
But if the girls were unchaste, the serpent left the cakes
untasted, and ants came and crumbled the rejected viands
and so removed them bit by bit from the sacred grove,
thereby purifying the hallowed spot from the stain it had
contracted by the presence of a defiled maiden.<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>De natura animalium</hi>, xi.
16; Propertius, v. 8. 3-14. The feeding
of the serpent is represented on a
Roman coin of about 64 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; on the
obverse of the coin appears the head
of Juno Caprotina. See E. Babelon,
<hi rend='italic'>Monnaies de la République Romaine</hi>
(Paris, 1886), ii. 402. A common
type of Greek art represents a woman
feeding a serpent out of a saucer. See
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
p. 75.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legend
told to explain
the
ritual of
the Thesmophoria.</note>
To explain the rude and ancient ritual of the Thesmophoria
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
the following legend was told. At the moment when
Pluto carried off Persephone, a swineherd called Eubuleus
chanced to be herding his swine on the spot, and his herd
was engulfed in the chasm down which Pluto vanished with
Persephone. Accordingly at the Thesmophoria pigs were
annually thrown into caverns to commemorate the disappearance
of the swine of Eubuleus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scholia in Lucianum</hi>, ed. H. Rabe,
pp. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It follows from this
that the casting of the pigs into the vaults at the Thesmophoria
formed part of the dramatic representation of
Persephone's descent into the lower world; and as no image
of Persephone appears to have been thrown in, we may infer
that the descent of the pigs was not so much an accompaniment
of her descent as the descent itself, in short, that the
pigs were Persephone. Afterwards when Persephone or
Demeter (for the two are equivalent) took on human form,
a reason had to be found for the custom of throwing pigs
into caverns at her festival; and this was done by saying
that when Pluto carried off Persephone, there happened to
be some swine browsing near, which were swallowed up
along with her. The story is obviously a forced and
awkward attempt to bridge over the gulf between the old
conception of the corn-spirit as a pig and the new conception
of her as an anthropomorphic goddess. A trace of the older
conception survived in the legend that when the sad mother
was searching for traces of the vanished Persephone, the
footprints of the lost one were obliterated by the footprints
of a pig;<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 461-466, upon
which Gierig remarks, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sues melius
poeta omisisset in hac narratione</foreign>.</q> Such
is the wisdom of the commentator.</note> originally, we may conjecture, the footprints of
the pig were the footprints of Persephone and of Demeter
herself. A consciousness of the intimate connexion of the
pig with the corn lurks in the legend that the swineherd
Eubuleus was a brother of Triptolemus, to whom Demeter
first imparted the secret of the corn. Indeed, according to
one version of the story, Eubuleus himself received, jointly
with his brother Triptolemus, the gift of the corn from
Demeter as a reward for revealing to her the fate of Persephone.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 14. 3.</note>
Further, it is to be noted that at the Thesmophoria
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
the women appear to have eaten swine's flesh.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>,
338.</note> The meal,
if I am right, must have been a solemn sacrament or communion,
the worshippers partaking of the body of the god.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy of
the Thesmophoria
to the folk-customs
of
Northern
Europe.</note>
As thus explained, the Thesmophoria has its analogies
in the folk-customs of Northern Europe which have been
already described. Just as at the Thesmophoria&mdash;an autumn
festival in honour of the corn-goddess&mdash;swine's flesh was
partly eaten, partly kept in caverns till the following year,
when it was taken up to be sown with the seed-corn in the
fields for the purpose of securing a good crop; so in the
neighbourhood of Grenoble the goat killed on the harvest-field
is partly eaten at the harvest-supper, partly pickled
and kept till the next harvest;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 285.</note> so at Pouilly the ox killed
on the harvest-field is partly eaten by the harvesters, partly
pickled and kept till the first day of sowing in spring,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 290.</note>
probably to be then mixed with the seed, or eaten by the
ploughmen, or both; so at Udvarhely the feathers of the
cock which is killed in the last sheaf at harvest are kept
till spring, and then sown with the seed on the field;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 278.</note> so in
Hesse and Meiningen the flesh of pigs is eaten on Ash
Wednesday or Candlemas, and the bones are kept till
sowing-time, when they are put into the field sown or mixed
with the seed in the bag;<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 300.</note> so, lastly, the corn from the last
sheaf is kept till Christmas, made into the Yule Boar, and
afterwards broken and mixed with the seed-corn at sowing
in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus, to put it generally, the corn-spirit is
killed in animal form in autumn; part of his flesh is eaten
as a sacrament by his worshippers; and part of it is kept
till next sowing-time or harvest as a pledge and security for
the continuance or renewal of the corn-spirit's energies.
Whether in the interval between autumn and spring he is
conceived as dead, or whether, like the ox in the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>,
he is supposed to come to life again immediately after being
killed, is not clear. At the Thesmophoria, according to
Clement and Pausanias, as emended by Lobeck,<note place='foot'>In Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 17, for μεγαρίζοντες χοίρους
ἐκβάλλουσι Lobeck (<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p.
831) would read μεγάροις ζῶντας χοίρους
ἐμβάλλουσι. For his emendation of
Pausanias, see above, p. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> note 1.</note> the pigs
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
were thrown in alive, and were supposed to reappear at the
festival of the following year. Here, therefore, if we accept
Lobeck's emendations, the corn-spirit is conceived as alive
throughout the year; he lives and works under ground, but
is brought up each autumn to be renewed and then replaced
in his subterranean abode.<note place='foot'>It is worth nothing that in Crete,
which was an ancient seat of Demeter
worship (see above, vol. i. p. 131), the
pig was esteemed very sacred and was
not eaten (Athenaeus, ix. 18, pp. 375
<hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>-376 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>). This would not exclude the
possibility of its being eaten sacramentally,
as at the Thesmophoria.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The horse-headed
Demeter of
Phigalia.</note>
If persons of fastidious taste should object that the Greeks
never could have conceived Demeter and Persephone to be
embodied in the form of pigs, it may be answered that in the
cave of Phigalia in Arcadia the Black Demeter was portrayed
with the head and mane of a horse on the body of a woman.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 42.</note>
Between the portrait of a goddess as a pig, and the portrait of
her as a woman with a horse's head, there is little to choose
in respect of barbarism. The legend told of the Phigalian
Demeter indicates that the horse was one of the animal
forms assumed in ancient Greece, as in modern Europe,<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> by
the corn-spirit. It was said that in her search for her
daughter, Demeter assumed the form of a mare to escape
the addresses of Poseidon, and that, offended at his importunity,
she withdrew in dudgeon to a cave not far from
Phigalia in the highlands of Western Arcadia. The very
cavern, now turned into a little Christian chapel with its
holy pictures, is still shewn to the curious traveller far down
the side of that profound ravine through which the brawling
Neda winds under overhanging woods to the sea. There,
robed in black, she tarried so long that the fruits of the earth
were perishing, and mankind would have died of famine if
Pan had not soothed the angry goddess and persuaded her to
quit the cave. In memory of this event, the Phigalians set
up an image of the Black Demeter in the cave; it represented
a woman dressed in a long robe, with the head and mane of
a horse.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 25 and 42. At
the sanctuary of the Mistress (that is,
of Persephone) in Arcadia many terracotta
statuettes have been found which
represent draped women with the heads
of cows or sheep. They are probably
votive images of Demeter or Persephone,
for the ritual of the sanctuary prescribed
the offering of images (Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No.
939, vol. ii. pp. 803 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). See P.
Perdrizet, <q>Terres-cuites de Lycosoura,
et mythologie arcadienne,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
Correspondance Hellénique</hi>, xxiii. (1899)
p. 635; M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 347 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the
Phigalian Demeter, see W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, pp. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
I well remember how on a summer
afternoon I sat at the mouth of the
shallow cave, watching the play of
sunshine on the lofty wooded sides of
the ravine and listening to the murmur
of the stream.</note> The Black Demeter, in whose absence the fruits
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
of the earth perish, is plainly a mythical expression for the
bare wintry earth stripped of its summer mantle of green.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Attis, Adonis, and the Pig.'/>
<head>§ 3. Attis, Adonis, and the Pig.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attis and
the pig.</note>
Passing now to Attis and Adonis, we may note a few
facts which seem to shew that these deities of vegetation
had also, like other deities of the same class, their animal
embodiments. The worshippers of Attis abstained from
eating the flesh of swine.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 221. On the position of
the pig in ancient Oriental and particularly
Semitic religion, see F. C.
Movers, <hi rend='italic'>Die Phoenizier</hi>, i. (Bonn, 1841),
pp. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> This appears to indicate that the
pig was regarded as an embodiment of Attis. And the
legend that Attis was killed by a boar<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 220.</note> points in the same
direction. For after the examples of the goat Dionysus and
the pig Demeter it may almost be laid down as a rule that
an animal which is said to have injured a god was originally
the god himself. Perhaps the cry of <q>Hyes Attes! Hyes
Attes!</q><note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De corona</hi>, p. 313.</note> which was raised by the worshippers of Attis, may
be neither more nor less than <q>Pig Attis! Pig Attis!</q>&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>hyes</foreign>
being possibly a Phrygian form of the Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>hȳs</foreign>, <q>a pig.</q><note place='foot'>The suggestion was made to me in
conversation by my lamented friend, the
late R. A. Neil of Pembroke College,
Cambridge.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Adonis and
the boar. Ambiguous
position of
pigs at Hierapolis.</note>
In regard to Adonis, his connexion with the boar was
not always explained by the story that he had been killed by
the animal.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 8; and to the authorities
there cited add Athenaeus, ii. 80, p.
69 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae
Compendium</hi>, 28; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
Conviv.</hi> iv. 5. 3, § 8; Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>Apologia</hi>,
II, p. 107, ed. J. Rendel Harris
(Cambridge, 1891); Joannes Lydus,
<hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iv. 44; Propertius,
iii. 4 (5). 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. F. A. Paley;
Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Divin. Instit.</hi> i. 17;
Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, vi. 7;
Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 9; Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturnal.</hi> i. 21. 4. See further W. W.
Graf Baudissin, <hi rend='italic'>Adonis und Esmun</hi>
(Leipsic, 1911), pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> According to another story, a boar rent with his
tusk the bark of the tree in which the infant Adonis was
born.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 186.</note> According to yet another story, he perished at the
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
hands of Hephaestus on Mount Lebanon while he was hunting
wild boars.<note place='foot'>W. Cureton, <hi rend='italic'>Spicilegium Syriacum</hi>
(London, 1855), p. 44.</note> These variations in the legend serve to shew
that, while the connexion of the boar with Adonis was
certain, the reason of the connexion was not understood,
and that consequently different stories were devised to
explain it. Certainly the pig ranked as a sacred animal
among the Syrians. At the great religious metropolis of
Hierapolis on the Euphrates pigs were neither sacrificed nor
eaten, and if a man touched a pig he was unclean for the rest
of the day. Some people said this was because the pigs were
unclean; others said it was because the pigs were sacred.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 54.</note>
This difference of opinion points to a hazy state of religious
thought in which the ideas of sanctity and uncleanness are
not yet sharply distinguished, both being blent in a sort of
vaporous solution to which we give the name of taboo. It
is quite consistent with this that the pig should have been
held to be an embodiment of the divine Adonis, and the
analogies of Dionysus and Demeter make it probable that
the story of the hostility of the animal to the god was
only a late misapprehension of the old view of the god as
embodied in a pig. The rule that pigs were not sacrificed
or eaten by worshippers of Attis and presumably of Adonis,
does not exclude the possibility that in these rituals the
pig was slain on solemn occasions as a representative of
the god and consumed sacramentally by the worshippers.
Indeed, the sacramental killing and eating of an animal
implies that the animal is sacred, and that, as a general
rule, it is spared.<note place='foot'>The heathen Harranians sacrificed
swine once a year and ate the flesh
(En-Nedîm, in D. Chwolsohn's <hi rend='italic'>Die
Ssabier und der Ssabismus</hi>, St. Petersburg,
1856, ii. 42). My friend W.
Robertson Smith conjectured that the
wild boars annually sacrificed in Cyprus
on 2nd April (Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>,
iv. 45) represented Adonis himself.
See his <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 411.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attitude of
the Jews to
the pig.</note>
The attitude of the Jews to the pig was as ambiguous as
that of the heathen Syrians towards the same animal. The
Greeks could not decide whether the Jews worshipped swine
or abominated them.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> iv. 5.</note> On the one hand they might not eat
swine; but on the other hand they might not kill them.
And if the former rule speaks for the uncleanness, the latter
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
speaks still more strongly for the sanctity of the animal.
For whereas both rules may, and one rule must, be explained
on the supposition that the pig was sacred; neither rule
must, and one rule cannot, be explained on the supposition
that the pig was unclean. If, therefore, we prefer the
former supposition, we must conclude that, originally at
least, the pig was revered rather than abhorred by the
Israelites. We are confirmed in this opinion by observing
that down to the time of Isaiah some of the Jews used to
meet secretly in gardens to eat the flesh of swine and mice
as a religious rite.<note place='foot'>Isaiah lxv. 3, lxvi. 3, 17. Compare
R. H. Kennett, <hi rend='italic'>The Composition
of the Book of Isaiah in the Light
of History and Archaeology</hi> (London,
1910) p. 61, who suggests that the
eating of the mouse as a sacrament
may have been derived from the Greek
worship of the Mouse Apollo (Apollo
Smintheus). As to the Mouse Apollo
see below, pp. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Doubtless this was a very ancient ceremony,
dating from a time when both the pig and the mouse
were venerated as divine, and when their flesh was partaken
of sacramentally on rare and solemn occasions as the body
and blood of gods. And in general it may be said that all
so-called unclean animals were originally sacred; the reason
for not eating them was that they were divine.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Osiris, the Pig and the Bull.'/>
<head>§ 4. Osiris, the Pig and the Bull.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attitude of
the ancient
Egyptians
to the pig. Annual
sacrifice of
pigs to
Osiris and
the moon.</note>
In ancient Egypt, within historical times, the pig
occupied the same dubious position as in Syria and
Palestine, though at first sight its uncleanness is more
prominent than its sanctity. The Egyptians are generally
said by Greek writers to have abhorred the pig as a foul and
loathsome animal.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 47; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 8; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> x.
16. Josephus merely says that the
Egyptian priests abstained from the
flesh of swine (<hi rend='italic'>Contra Apionem</hi>, ii. 13).</note> If a man so much as touched a pig in
passing, he stepped into the river with all his clothes on, to
wash off the taint.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> To drink pig's milk was believed to
cause leprosy to the drinker.<note place='foot'>Plutarch and Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> Swineherds, though natives
of Egypt, were forbidden to enter any temple, and they were
the only men who were thus excluded. No one would give
his daughter in marriage to a swineherd, or marry a swineherd's
daughter; the swineherds married among themselves.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> At Castabus in
Chersonese there was a sacred precinct
of Hemithea, which no one might
approach who had touched or eaten of
a pig (Diodorus Siculus, v. 62. 5).</note>
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
Yet once a year the Egyptians sacrificed pigs to the moon
and to Osiris, and not only sacrificed them, but ate of their
flesh, though on any other day of the year they would
neither sacrifice them nor taste of their flesh. Those who
were too poor to offer a pig on this day baked cakes of
dough, and offered them instead.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Aelian and
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi> Herodotus distinguishes
the sacrifice to the moon from that to
Osiris. According to him, at the
sacrifice to the moon, the extremity of
the pig's tail, together with the spleen
and the caul, was covered with fat
and burned; the rest of the flesh was
eaten. On the evening (not the eve,
see H. Stein's note on the passage) of
the festival the sacrifice to Osiris took
place. Each man slew a pig before
his door, then gave it to the swineherd,
from whom he had bought it, to take
away.</note> This can hardly be
explained except by the supposition that the pig was a
sacred animal which was eaten sacramentally by his
worshippers once a year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief that
the eating
of a sacred
animal
causes skin-disease,
especially
leprosy.</note>
The view that in Egypt the pig was sacred is borne
out by the very facts which, to moderns, might seem to
prove the contrary. Thus the Egyptians thought, as
we have seen, that to drink pig's milk produced leprosy.
But exactly analogous views are held by savages about
the animals and plants which they deem most sacred.
Thus in the island of Wetar (between New Guinea and
Celebes) people believe themselves to be variously descended
from wild pigs, serpents, crocodiles, turtles, dogs, and eels; a
man may not eat an animal of the kind from which he is
descended; if he does so, he will become a leper, and go
mad.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), pp. 432,
452.</note> Amongst the Omaha Indians of North America men
whose totem is the elk, believe that if they ate the flesh
of the male elk they would break out in boils and white
spots in different parts of their bodies.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Omaha
Sociology,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1884), p. 225; Miss A. C. Fletcher
and F. la Flesche, <q>The Omaha
Tribe,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Twenty-seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1911), p. 144.
According to the latter writers, any
breach of a clan taboo among the
Omahas was supposed to be punished
either by the breaking out of sores
or white spots on the body of the
offender or by his hair turning white.</note> In the same
tribe men whose totem is the red maize, think that if
they ate red maize they would have running sores all round
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
their mouths.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 231.</note> The Bush negroes of Surinam, who practise
totemism, believe that if they ate the <foreign rend='italic'>capiaï</foreign> (an animal like
a pig) it would give them leprosy;<note place='foot'>J. Crevaux, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans l'Amérique
du Sud</hi> (Paris, 1883), p. 59.</note> perhaps the <foreign rend='italic'>capiaï</foreign>
is one of their totems. The Syrians, in antiquity, who
esteemed fish sacred, thought that if they ate fish their
bodies would break out in ulcers, and their feet and
stomach would swell up.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De superstitione</hi>, 10;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, iv. 15. As
to the sanctity of fish among the
Syrians, see also Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, ii. 473 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4.</note> The Nyanja-speaking tribes of
Central Angoniland, in British Central Africa, believe that if
a person eats his totemic animal, his body will break out in
spots. The cure for this eruption of the skin is to bathe the
body in a decoction made from the bone of the animal, the
eating of which caused the malady.<note place='foot'>R. Sutherland Rattray, <hi rend='italic'>Some Folklore
Stories and Songs in Chinyanja</hi>
(London, 1907), pp. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Wagogo of
German East Africa imagine that the sin of eating the
totemic animal is visited not on the sinner himself but on
his innocent kinsfolk. Thus when they see a child with a
scald head, they say at once that its father has been eating
his totem and that is why the poor child has scabs on its
pate.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Cole, <q>Notes on the
Wagogo of German East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 307, compare p. 317.</note> Among the Wahehe, another tribe of German East
Africa, a man who suffers from scab or other skin disease
will often set the trouble down to his having unwittingly
partaken of his totemic animal.<note place='foot'>E. Nigmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wahehe</hi> (Berlin,
1908), p. 42.</note> Similarly among the
Waheia, another tribe of the same region, if a man kills or
eats the totemic animal of his clan, he is supposed to suffer
from an eruption of the skin.<note place='foot'>J. Kohler, <q>Das Banturecht in
Ostafrika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für vergleichende
Rechtswissenschaft</hi>, xv. (1902) pp. 2,
3.</note> In like manner the Bantu
tribes of Kavirondo, in Central Africa, hold that the eating
of the totem produces a severe cutaneous eruption, which
can however be cured by mixing an extract of certain
herbs with the fat of a black ox and rubbing the body of the
sufferer all over with the mixture.<note place='foot'>C. W. Hobley, <q>Anthropological
Studies in Kavirondo and Nandi,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxiii. (1903) p. 347.</note> The Chasas of Orissa
believe that if they were to injure their totemic animal, they
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
would be attacked by leprosy and their line would die out.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, II. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Uriya
Castes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 16.</note>
These examples prove that the eating of a sacred animal
is often believed to produce leprosy or other skin-diseases;
so far, therefore, they support the view that the pig must
have been sacred in Egypt, since the effect of drinking its
milk was believed to be leprosy. Such fancies may perhaps
have been sometimes suggested by the observation that the
eating of semi-putrid flesh, to which some savages are
addicted, is apt to be followed by eruptions on the skin.
Indeed, many modern authorities attribute leprosy to this
cause, particularly to the eating of half rotten fish.<note place='foot'>C. Creighton, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Leprosy,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, iii. col. 2766.</note> It
seems not impossible that the abhorrence which the Hebrews
entertained of leprosy, and the pains which they took to
seclude lepers from the community, may have been based on
religious as well as on purely sanitary grounds; they may
have imagined that the disfigurement of the sufferers was a
penalty which they had incurred by some infraction of
taboo. Certainly we read in the Old Testament of cases of
leprosy which the historian regarded as the direct consequence
of sin.<note place='foot'>2 Kings v. 27; 2 Chronicles
xxvi. 16-21.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mere contact
with
a sacred
object is
deemed
dangerous
and calls
for purification
as a
sort of disinfectant.</note>
Again, the rule that, after touching a pig, a man had to
wash himself and his clothes, also favours the view of the
sanctity of the pig. For it is a common belief that the
effect of contact with a sacred object must be removed, by
washing or otherwise, before a man is free to mingle with
his fellows. Thus the Jews wash their hands after reading
the sacred scriptures. Before coming forth from the tabernacle
after the sin-offering, the high priest had to wash
himself, and put off the garments which he had worn in the
holy place.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xvi. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It was a rule of Greek ritual that, in offering
an expiatory sacrifice, the sacrificer should not touch the
sacrifice, and that, after the offering was made, he must wash
his body and his clothes in a river or spring before he could
enter a city or his own house.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 44.
For this and the Jewish examples I am
indebted to my friend W. Robertson
Smith. Compare his <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 351, 426, 450 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Parjas, a small tribe of
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
the Central Provinces in India, are divided into clans which
have for their respective totems the tiger, the tortoise, the
goat, a big lizard, a dove, and so on. If a man accidentally
kills his totemic animal, <q>the earthen cooking-pots of his
household are thrown away, the clothes are washed, and the
house is purified with water in which the bark of the mango
or <foreign rend='italic'>jamun</foreign> tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Eugenia jambolana</foreign>) has been steeped. This
is in sign of mourning, as it is thought that such an act
will bring misfortune.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, VII. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1911), p. 97.</note> If a Chadwar of the Central
Provinces who has the pig for his totem should even see a
pig killed by somebody else, he will throw away the household
crockery and clean the house as if on the death of
a member of his family.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, I. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Hindustani
Castes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 32.</note> The Polynesians felt strongly
the need of ridding themselves of the sacred contagion, if it
may be so called, which they caught by touching sacred
objects. Various ceremonies were performed for the purpose
of removing this contagion. We have seen, for example,
how in Tonga a man who happened to touch a sacred chief,
or anything personally belonging to him, had to perform a
certain ceremony before he could feed himself with his
hands; otherwise it was believed that he would swell up
and die, or at least be afflicted with scrofula or some other
disease.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, pp. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We have seen, too, what fatal effects are supposed
to follow, and do actually follow, from contact with a sacred
object in New Zealand.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> pp. 134-136.</note> In short, primitive man believes
that what is sacred is dangerous; it is pervaded by a sort of
electrical sanctity which communicates a shock to, even if it
does not kill, whatever comes in contact with it. Hence
the savage is unwilling to touch or even to see that which
he deems peculiarly holy. Thus Bechuanas, of the Crocodile
clan, think it <q>hateful and unlucky</q> to meet or see a
crocodile; the sight is thought to cause inflammation of the
eyes. Yet the crocodile is their most sacred object; they
call it their father, swear by it, and celebrate it in their
festivals.<note place='foot'>E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi> (London,
1861), p. 211; D. Livingstone, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary
Travels and Researches in South
Africa</hi> (London, 1857), p. 255; John
Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years north of the
Orange River</hi> (Edinburgh, 1871), p.
135 note. See further <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, ii. 372.</note> The goat is the sacred animal of the Madenassana
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
Bushmen; yet <q>to look upon it would be to render the man
for the time impure, as well as to cause him undefined uneasiness.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
The Elk clan, among the Omaha Indians,
believe that even to touch the male elk would be followed
by an eruption of boils and white spots on the body.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Omaha
Sociology,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1884), p. 225.</note>
Members of the Reptile clan in the same tribe think that if
one of them touches or smells a snake, it will make his hair
white.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 275.</note> In Samoa people whose god was a butterfly believed
that if they caught a butterfly it would strike them
dead.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi> (London, 1884),
p. 76.</note> Again, in Samoa the reddish-seared leaves of the
banana-tree were commonly used as plates for handing food;
but if any member of the Wild Pigeon family had used
banana leaves for this purpose, it was supposed that he would
suffer from rheumatic swellings or an eruption all over the
body like chicken-pox.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 70.</note> The Mori clan of the Bhils in
Central India worship the peacock as their totem and make
offerings of grain to it; yet members of the clan believe that
were they even to set foot on the tracks of a peacock they
would afterwards suffer from some disease, and if a woman
sees a peacock she must veil her face and look away.<note place='foot'>Captain C. Eckford Luard, in <hi rend='italic'>Census
of India, 1901</hi>, vol. xix. <hi rend='italic'>Central India</hi>,
Part i. (Lucknow, 1902) pp. 299 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
also <hi rend='italic'>Census of India, 1901</hi>, vol. i.
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Appendices</hi> (Calcutta,
1903), p. 163.</note> Thus
the primitive mind seems to conceive of holiness as a sort of
dangerous virus, which a prudent man will shun as far as
possible, and of which, if he should chance to be infected
by it, he will carefully disinfect himself by some form of
ceremonial purification.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
pig was
probably
at first a
sacred animal
with
the Egyptians,
and
may have
been regarded as
an embodiment
of the
corn-god
Osiris,
though at
a later time
he was
looked on
as an embodiment
of Typhon,
the enemy
of Osiris. The havoc
wrought by
wild boars
in the corn
is a reason
for regarding
them as
foes of the
corn-god.</note>
In the light of these parallels the beliefs and customs of
the Egyptians touching the pig are probably to be explained
as based upon an opinion of the extreme sanctity rather
than of the extreme uncleanness of the animal; or rather, to
put it more correctly, they imply that the animal was looked
on, not simply as a filthy and disgusting creature, but as a
being endowed with high supernatural powers, and that as
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
such it was regarded with that primitive sentiment of
religious awe and fear in which the feelings of reverence and
abhorrence are almost equally blended. The ancients themselves
seem to have been aware that there was another side
to the horror with which swine seemed to inspire the
Egyptians. For the Greek astronomer and mathematician
Eudoxus, who resided fourteen months in Egypt and conversed
with the priests,<note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius, <hi rend='italic'>Vitae Philosophorum</hi>,
viii. 8.</note> was of opinion that the Egyptians
spared the pig, not out of abhorrence, but from a regard to
its utility in agriculture; for, according to him, when the
Nile had subsided, herds of swine were turned loose over the
fields to tread the seed down into the moist earth.<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> x. 16. The
story is repeated by Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xviii. 168.</note> But
when a being is thus the object of mixed and implicitly contradictory
feelings, he may be said to occupy a position of
unstable equilibrium. In course of time one of the contradictory
feelings is likely to prevail over the other, and
according as the feeling which finally predominates is that
of reverence or abhorrence, the being who is the object of it
will rise into a god or sink into a devil. The latter, on the
whole, was the fate of the pig in Egypt. For in historical
times the fear and horror of the pig seem certainly to have
outweighed the reverence and worship of which he may
once have been the object, and of which, even in his fallen
state, he never quite lost trace. He came to be looked on
as an embodiment of Set or Typhon, the Egyptian devil
and enemy of Osiris. For it was in the shape of a black pig
that Typhon injured the eye of the god Horus, who burned
him and instituted the sacrifice of the pig, the sun-god Ra
having declared the beast abominable.<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le Mythe Osirien</hi>,
Première Partie, <hi rend='italic'>Les yeux d'Horus</hi>
(Paris, 1874), p. 44; <hi rend='italic'>The Book of the
Dead</hi>, English translation by E. A.
Wallis Budge (London, 1901), ii. 336
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, chapter cxii.; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi> (London,
1904), i. 496 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi> (London and
New York, 1911), i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the story
that Typhon was hunting a boar when he discovered and
mangled the body of Osiris, and that this was the reason why
pigs were sacrificed once a year,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 8. E. Lefébure
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 46) recognises that in
this story the boar is Typhon himself.</note> is clearly a modernised version
of an older story that Osiris, like Adonis and Attis, was slain
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
or mangled by a boar, or by Typhon in the form of a boar.
Thus, the annual sacrifice of a pig to Osiris might naturally
be interpreted as vengeance inflicted on the hostile animal that
had slain or mangled the god. But, in the first place, when
an animal is thus killed as a solemn sacrifice once and once
only in the year, it generally or always means that the animal
is divine, that he is spared and respected the rest of the year
as a god and slain, when he is slain, also in the character of
a god.<note place='foot'>This important principle was first
recognised by W. Robertson Smith.
See his article, <q>Sacrifice,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>, Ninth Edition, xxi.
137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare his <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 373, 410 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the second place, the examples of Dionysus and
Demeter, if not of Attis and Adonis, have taught us that the
animal which is sacrificed to a god on the ground that he is
the god's enemy may have been, and probably was, originally
the god himself. Therefore, the annual sacrifice of a pig to
Osiris, coupled with the alleged hostility of the animal to the
god, tends to shew, first, that originally the pig was a god,
and, second, that he was Osiris. At a later age, when Osiris
became anthropomorphic and his original relation to the
pig had been forgotten, the animal was first distinguished
from him, and afterwards opposed as an enemy to him by
mythologists who could think of no reason for killing a
beast in connexion with the worship of a god except that
the beast was the god's enemy; or, as Plutarch puts it, not
that which is dear to the gods, but that which is the contrary,
is fit to be sacrificed.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 31.</note> At this later stage the havoc
which a wild boar notoriously makes amongst the corn would
supply a plausible reason for regarding him as the foe
of the corn-spirit, though originally, if I am right, the very
freedom with which the boar ranged at will through the
corn led people to identify him with the corn-spirit, to
whom he was afterwards opposed as an enemy.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evidence of
the depredations
committed
by wild
boars on
the crops.</note>
As the depredations committed by wild swine on the
growing crops in countries where these creatures abound are
necessarily unfamiliar to most English readers, it may be
well to illustrate them by examples. Thus, for instance,
in Palestine the wild boar <q>is eagerly chased and destroyed
on account of the frightful ravages it makes among the
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
crops. Not only does it devour any fruits within reach,
but in a single night a party of wild boars will uproot a
whole field, and destroy the husbandman's hopes for the
year. The places they love to frequent are the reedy
marshes and thickets by rivers and lakes, and they swarm
in the thickets all along the banks of the Jordan from
Jericho to the Lake of Gennesaret. From these fastnesses,
whence neither dog nor man can dislodge them, they make
nightly forays upon the corn-fields and root-crops of the
villagers, returning at daybreak to their coverts. About
Jericho they are especially destructive, and when the barley
crop is ripening, the husbandmen have to keep nightly watch
to drive them away. Their presence can always be detected
by the crashing noise they make in forcing their way through
the thickets, when the men fire, guided by the sound.</q><note place='foot'>H. B. Tristram, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural
History of the Bible</hi>, Ninth Edition
(London, 1898), pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Wild pigs are the special enemies of the crops in South
Africa; the fences constructed by the Zulus round their
gardens are mainly designed to guard against the devastating
depredations of these brutes, though porcupines, baboons,
hippopotamuses, and elephants also make havoc of the ripe
grain. Sometimes small huts are erected on platforms in
the gardens, and in these huts watchers are set to scare away
the nocturnal invaders.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of
Natal and the Zulu Country</hi> (London,
1857), pp. 18-20.</note> So in British Central Africa sentinels
are posted day and night in huts raised on platforms to protect
the maize fields from the inroads of baboons and of wild pigs,
which are still more destructive than the baboons, for they
grub up the plants as well as devour the grain; and the
watchers drum continually on any metal they have at hand
to keep the marauders at bay.<note place='foot'>Miss A. Werner, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of
British Central Africa</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the island of Nias whole
fields are sometimes trampled down by these pests between
sunset and sunrise. Often the stillness of the serene equatorial
night is broken by the strident cries of the watchers
of the fields; the sound goes echoing through the wooded
valleys for a long time, and here and there a dull grunting
tells that the efforts of the sentinels have not been in vain.<note place='foot'>E. Modigliano, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi>
(Milan, 1890), pp. 524 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 601.</note>
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
In Northern Luzon, of the Philippine Archipelago, the rice-fields
are similarly exposed to the depredations of wild
hogs, and watchers remain on guard day and night in outlooks,
sometimes in commodious structures of stone erected
for the purpose, who burn fires at night to frighten the
animals away.<note place='foot'>A. E. Jenks, <hi rend='italic'>The Bontoc Igorot</hi>,
(Manilla, 1905), pp. 100, 102.</note> At the beginning of their annual agricultural
labours the Banars of Cambodia pray to Yang-Seri that
he would be pleased to give them plenty of rice and to prevent
the wild boars from eating it up.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Gebirgs-stämme in Kambodia,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde
zu Berlin</hi>, i. (1866) p. 44.</note> In Gayo-land, a
district of Sumatra, the worst enemies of the rice crops are
wild swine and field mice; the whole of the harvest is sometimes
destroyed by their inroads.<note place='foot'>G. Snouck Hurgronje, <hi rend='italic'>Het Gajōland
en zijne Bewoners</hi> (Batavia, 1903), p.
348.</note> Among the Kai of
German New Guinea people who are engaged in the labour
of the fields will on no account eat pork. The reason is
that pigs, both wild and tame, are the most dangerous foes
of the crops; therefore it seems clear to the mind of the
Kai that if a field labourer were to eat pork, the flesh of the
dead pig in his stomach would attract the living pigs into
the field.<note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben
der Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi> (Berlin, 1911), p. 125.</note> Perhaps this superstition, based on the principle
of sympathetic magic, may explain the aversion to pork
which was entertained by some of the agricultural peoples
of the Eastern Mediterranean in antiquity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
ravages of
wild boars
among the
crops help
us to understand
the
ambiguous
attitude of
the ancient
Egyptians
to swine.</note>
To people thus familiarised with the ravages of wild boars
among the ripe crops the idea might naturally present itself
that the animal is either the enemy of the corn-god or perhaps
the corn-god himself come in person to enjoy his own
despite all the efforts of mankind to keep him out of his
rights. Hence we can understand how an agricultural
people like the ancient Egyptians may have identified
the wild boar either with their corn-god Osiris or with his
enemy Typhon. The view which identifies the pig with
Osiris derives not a little support from the sacrifice of
pigs to him on the very day on which, according to
tradition, Osiris himself was killed;<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le Mythe Osirien</hi>,
Première Partie, <hi rend='italic'>Les yeux d'Horus</hi>
(Paris, 1874), pp. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for thus the killing
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
of the pig was the annual representation of the killing of
Osiris, just as the throwing of the pigs into the caverns at the
Thesmophoria was an annual representation of the descent of
Persephone into the lower world; and both customs are
parallel to the European practice of killing a goat, cock, and
so forth, at harvest as a representative of the corn-spirit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Egyptian
sacrifices of
red oxen
and red-haired
men.</note>
Again, the theory that the pig, originally Osiris himself,
afterwards came to be regarded as an embodiment of his
enemy Typhon, is supported by the similar relation of red-haired
men and red oxen to Typhon. For in regard to the
red-haired men who were burned and whose ashes were
scattered with winnowing-fans, we have seen fair grounds for
believing that originally, like the red-haired puppies killed
at Rome in spring, they were representatives of the corn-spirit
himself, that is, of Osiris, and were slain for the express
purpose of making the corn turn red or golden.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Adonis,
Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 331,
338.</note> Yet at
a later time these men were explained to be representatives,
not of Osiris, but of his enemy Typhon,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 33, 73;
Diodorus Siculus, i. 88.</note> and the killing of
them was regarded as an act of vengeance inflicted on the
enemy of the god. Similarly, the red oxen sacrificed by the
Egyptians were said to be offered on the ground of their
resemblance to Typhon;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 31; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 88. Compare Herodotus,
ii. 38.</note> though it is more likely that
originally they were slain on the ground of their resemblance
to the corn-spirit Osiris. We have seen that the ox is a
common representative of the corn-spirit and is slain as such
on the harvest-field.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris identified
with
the sacred
bulls Apis
and Mnevis. Stratification
of three
great types
of religion
or superstition
in
ancient
Egypt.</note>
Osiris was regularly identified with the bull Apis of
Memphis and the bull Mnevis of Heliopolis.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 20, 29,
33, 43; Strabo, xvii. 1. 31; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 21, 85; Duncker, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
des Alterthums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> On Apis
and Mnevis, see also Herodotus, ii. 153,
with A. Wiedemann's comment, iii. 27
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 14.
7; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 184 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Solinus, xxxii. 17-21; Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De natura
deorum</hi>, i. 29; Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate
Dei</hi>, xviii. 5; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi>
xi. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi>
viii. 1. 3; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 5, 35;
Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio Evangelii</hi>, iii.
13. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Pausanias, i. 18. 4, vii. 22.
3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Orientis Graeci
Inscriptiones Selectae</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1905),
Nos. 56, 90 (vol. i. pp. 98, 106,
159). Both Apis and Mnevis were
black bulls, but Apis had certain white
spots. See A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion
der alten Aegypter</hi> (Münster i.
W., 1890), pp. 95, 99-101. When
Apis died, pious people used to put on
mourning and to fast, drinking only
water and eating only vegetables, for
seventy days till the burial. See
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>
(Berlin, 1905), pp. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But it is hard
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
to say whether these bulls were embodiments of him as the
corn-spirit, as the red oxen appear to have been, or whether
they were not in origin entirely distinct deities who came to
be fused with Osiris at a later time. The universality of the
worship of these two bulls<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 21.</note> seems to put them on a different
footing from the ordinary sacred animals whose worships were
purely local. Hence if the latter were evolved from totems,
as they may have been, some other origin would have to be
found for the worship of Apis and Mnevis. If these bulls
were not originally embodiments of the corn-god Osiris, they
may possibly be descendants of the sacred cattle worshipped
by a pastoral people.<note place='foot'>On the religious reverence of pastoral
peoples for their cattle, and the
possible derivation of the Apis and
Isis-Hathor worship from the pastoral
stage of society, see W. Robertson
Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp.
296 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If this were so, ancient Egypt would
exhibit a stratification of three great types of religion or
superstition corresponding to three great stages of society.
Totemism, which may be roughly described as a species of
superstitious respect paid to wild animals and plants by many
tribes in the hunting stage of society, would be represented by
the worship of the local sacred animals; the worship of cattle,
which belongs to society in the pastoral stage, would be represented
by the cults of Apis and Mnevis; and the worship of
cultivated plants, which is peculiar to society in the agricultural
stage, would be represented by the religion of Osiris
and Isis. The Egyptian reverence for cows, which were
never killed,<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 41.</note> might belong either to the second or the third
of these stages. The consecration of cows to Isis, who was
portrayed with cow's horns<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 41, with A. Wiedemann's
commentary; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, 19; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>
(London and New York, 1911),
i. 8. In his commentary on the
passage of Herodotus Prof. Wiedemann
observes (p. 188) that <q>the Egyptian
name of the Isis-cow is <foreign rend='italic'>ḥes-t</foreign> and is one
of the few cases in which the name of
the sacred animal coincides with that
of the deity.</q></note> and may have been supposed to
be incarnate in the animals, would indicate that they, like
the red oxen, were embodiments of the corn-spirit. However,
this identification of Isis with the cow, like that of Osiris
with the bulls Apis and Mnevis, may be only an effect of
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
syncretism. But whatever the original relation of Apis to
Osiris may have been, there is one fact about the former
which ought not to be passed over in a disquisition on the
custom of killing a god. Although the bull Apis was
worshipped as a god with much pomp and profound reverence,
he was not suffered to live beyond a certain length of
time which was prescribed by the sacred books, and on the
expiry of which he was drowned in a holy spring.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 184; Solinus,
xxxii. 18; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii.
14. 7. The spring or well in which he
was drowned was perhaps the one from
which his drinking-water was procured;
he might not drink the water of the
Nile (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 5).</note> The
limit, according to Plutarch, was twenty-five years;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 56.</note> but it
cannot always have been enforced, for the tombs of the Apis
bulls have been discovered in modern times, and from the
inscriptions on them it appears that in the twenty-second
dynasty two of the holy steers lived more than twenty-six
years.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
(Paris, 1886), p. 31. Compare Duncker,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> i. 56. It
has been conjectured that the period of
twenty-five years was determined by
astronomical considerations, that being
a period which harmonises the phases of
the moon with the days of the Egyptian
year. See L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der
mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</hi>
(Berlin, 1825-1826), i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>On the
stratification
of religions
corresponding
to certain
social
types.</note>
To prevent misunderstandings it may be well to add
that what I have just said as to the stratification of three
great types of religion or superstition corresponding to three
great types of society is not meant to sketch, even in outline,
the evolution of religion as a whole. I by no means wish
to suggest that the reverence for wild animals and plants,
the reverence for domestic cattle, and the reverence for
cultivated plants are the only forms of religion or superstition
which prevail at the corresponding stages of social
development; all that I desire to convey is that they are
characteristic of these stages respectively. The elements
which make up any religious system are far too numerous
and their interaction far too complex to be adequately
summed up in a few simple formulas. To mention only
a single factor of which I have taken no account in
indicating roughly a certain correspondence between the
strata of religion and of society, the fear of the spirits of the
dead appears to have been one of the most powerful factors,
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
perhaps, indeed, the most powerful of all, in shaping the
course of religious evolution at every stage of social development
from the lowest to the highest; and for that very
reason it is not specially characteristic of any one form of
society. And the three types of religion or superstition
which I have selected as characteristic of three stages of
society are far from being strictly limited each to its corresponding
step in the social ladder. For example, although
totemism, or a particular species of reverence paid by
groups of men to wild animals and plants, probably always
originated in the hunting stage of society, it has by no
means been confined to that primitive phase of human
development but has often survived not only into the
pastoral but into the agricultural stage, as we may see for
example by the case of many tribes in Africa, India, and
America; and it seems likely that a similar overlapping of
the various strata takes place in every instance. In short,
we cannot really dissect the history of mankind as it were
with a knife into a series of neat sections each sharply marked
off from all the rest by a texture and colour of its own; we
may indeed do so theoretically for the convenience of exposition,
but practically the textures interlace, the colours
melt and run into each other by insensible gradations that
defy the edge of the finest instrument of analysis which we
can apply to them. It is a mere truism to say that the
abstract generalisations of science can never adequately
comprehend all the particulars of concrete reality. The
facts of nature will always burst the narrow bonds of
human theories.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reverence
of the
Dinka for
their cattle.</note>
Before quitting this part of our subject it may be well
to illustrate by one or two examples the reverence which
primitive pastoral tribes pay to their cattle, since, as I have
just indicated, the worship of sacred bulls by the ancient
Egyptians, like the modern Hindoo worship of cows, may
very well have been directly derived from a similar respect
paid by their remote ancestors to their cattle. A good
instance is supplied by the Dinka, a large cattle-breeding
tribe, or rather nation, of the White Nile. <q>Every idea
and thought of the Dinka,</q> says Schweinfurth, <q>is how to
acquire and maintain cattle: a kind of reverence would
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
seem to be paid to them; even their offal is considered of
high importance; the dung, which is burnt to ashes for
sleeping in and for smearing their persons, and the urine,
which is used for washing and as a substitute for salt, are
their daily requisites. It must be owned that it is hard
to reconcile this latter usage with our ideas of cleanliness.
A cow is never slaughtered, but when sick it is segregated
from the rest, and carefully tended in the large huts built for
the purpose. Only those that die naturally or by an accident
are used as food. All this, which exists among most of the
pastoral tribes of Africa, may perchance appear to be a
lingering remnant of an exploded cattle-worship; but I may
draw attention to the fact that the Dinka are by no means
disinclined to partake of any feast of their flesh, provided
that the slaughtered animal was not their own property. It
is thus more the delight of actual possession, than any superstitious
estimate, that makes the cow to them an object
of reverence. Indescribable is the grief when either death
or rapine has robbed a Dinka of his cattle. He is prepared
to redeem their loss by the heaviest sacrifices, for they are
dearer to him than wife or child. A dead cow is not,
however, wantonly buried; the negro is not sentimental
enough for that; such an occurrence is soon bruited abroad,
and the neighbours institute a carousal, which is quite an
epoch in their monotonous life. The bereaved owner himself
is, however, too much afflicted at the loss to be able to
touch a morsel of the carcass of his departed beast. Not
unfrequently in their sorrow the Dinka remain for days
silent and abstracted, as though their trouble were too heavy
for them to bear.</q><note place='foot'>G. Schweinfurth, <hi rend='italic'>The Heart of Africa</hi>, Third Edition (London, 1878),
i. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A rich Dinka will sometimes keep a
favourite ox and treat it with such marks of respect that an
observer has compared the animal to the Apis of the
ancient Egyptians. <q>Here and there,</q> we are told, <q>beside
the hut of a wealthy negro is set up a great withered
tree. From its boughs hang vessels containing food and
perhaps trophies of war; to its trunk is fastened the
great drum (<foreign rend='italic'>Noqara</foreign>), which summons to war or to the
dance. To this tree, separated from the rest of the cattle,
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
is tethered a great fat ox. It is of a white colour passing
into a slaty grey on the shoulders and legs: its long horns
are artificially bent to opposite sides and adorned with
bunches of hair: the tuft of the tail is cut off. This is the
<foreign rend='italic'>makwi</foreign>, the Apis of the negro. His master, who has singled
him out from his youth for his colour and certain marks, has
cherished and reared him in order that he may one day be
his pride in the eyes of the village. He has gelded him,
adorned him, trained him to walk at the head of the herd,
to dance, and to fight. His <foreign rend='italic'>makwi</foreign> is always an object of
his tenderest attention; he never fails to bring him a bundle
of the finest herbs; if he can procure a bell, he hangs it
round the animal's neck; and at evening, if he has milk or
<foreign rend='italic'>meriṣa</foreign> enough for guests, the drum is beaten to summon the
youth to come and dance round the deified ox.</q><note place='foot'>E. de Pruyssenaere, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen und
Forschungen im Gebiete des Weissen und
Blauen Nil</hi> (Gotha, 1877), pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Petermann's Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</hi>,
No. 50).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reverence
of the
Nuehr for
their cattle.</note>
Again, speaking of the Nuehr, another pastoral tribe of
the Upper Nile, a traveller tells us that <q>as among the Dinka,
so among the Nuehr-negroes the cattle enjoy a respect,
indeed we may say a veneration, which reminds us of the
animal worship of the ancient Egyptians, especially of that
of the holy steer Apis, though the respect may be grounded
on the simple fact that cattle are the only possession of these
negroes. The largest and handsomest bull is the leader of
the herd; he is decked with bunches of hair and small bells,
marked out from the rest in every way, and regarded as the
guardian genius of the herd as well as of the family. His
loss is the greatest misfortune that can befall his owner. At
night his master drives the animal round the herd, couched
about the smoky fire, and sings of his beauty and courage,
while the bull signifies his contentment by a complacent
lowing. To him his master every morning commits the herd,
in order that he may guide them to the best pastures and
guard them from danger; in him he reveres his ideal of all
that is beautiful and strong; nay he designates him by the
same name which he applies to his own dim conception of a
Supreme Being, <foreign rend='italic'>Nyeledit</foreign>, and to the thunder.</q><note place='foot'>Ernst Marno, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im Gebiete
des Blauen und Weissen Nil</hi> (Vienna,
1874), p. 343. The name <foreign rend='italic'>Nyeledit</foreign> is
explained by the writer to mean <q>very
great and mighty.</q> It is probably
equivalent to <foreign rend='italic'>Nyalich</foreign>, which Dr. C. G.
Seligmann gives as a synonym for
Dengdit, the high god of the Dinka.
According to Dr. Seligmann, <foreign rend='italic'>Nyalich</foreign>
is the locative of a word meaning
<q>above</q> and, literally translated,
signifies, <q>in the above.</q> See C. G.
Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Dinka,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
of Religion and Ethics</hi>, edited
by J. Hastings, D.D., vol. iv. (Edinburgh,
1911), p. 707. The Sakalava of
Ampasimene, in Madagascar, are said to
worship a black bull which is kept in a
sacred enclosure in the island of Nosy
Be. On the death of the sacred bull
another is substituted for it. See A.
van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et Totémisme à
Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), pp. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
quoting J. Carol, <hi rend='italic'>Chez les Hova</hi> (Paris,
1898), pp. 418 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> But as the Sakalava
are not, so far as I know, mainly
or exclusively a pastoral people, this
example of bull-worship does not
strictly belong to the class illustrated
in the text.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Virbius and the Horse.'/>
<head>§ 5. Virbius and the Horse.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The tradition
that
Virbius
had been
killed in
the character
of
Hippolytus
by horses,
and the
custom of
excluding
horses from
the sacred
Arician
grove, may
point to the
conclusion
that the
horse was
regarded as
an embodiment
of
Virbius and
was annually
sacrificed
in the
grove.
Similarly
at Athens
the goat
was usually
excluded
from the
Acropolis
but was admitted
once
a year for
a necessary
sacrifice.</note>
We are now in a position to hazard a conjecture as to
the meaning of the tradition that Virbius, the first of the
divine Kings of the Wood at Aricia, had been killed in the
character of Hippolytus by horses.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Having found, first,
that spirits of the corn are not infrequently represented in the
form of horses;<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp 292-294.</note> and, second, that the animal which in later
legends is said to have injured the god was sometimes
originally the god himself, we may conjecture that the
horses by which Virbius or Hippolytus was said to have been
slain were really embodiments of him as a deity of vegetation.
The myth that he had been killed by horses was probably
invented to explain certain features in his worship, amongst
others the custom of excluding horses from his sacred grove.
For myth changes while custom remains constant; men
continue to do what their fathers did before them, though
the reasons on which their fathers acted have been long
forgotten. The history of religion is a long attempt to
reconcile old custom with new reason, to find a sound theory
for an absurd practice. In the case before us we may be
sure that the myth is more modern than the custom and by
no means represents the original reason for excluding horses
from the grove. From their exclusion it might be inferred
that horses could not be the sacred animals or embodiments
of the god of the grove. But the inference would be rash.
The goat was at one time a sacred animal or embodiment
of Athena, as may be inferred from the practice of representing
the goddess clad in a goat-skin (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>aegis</foreign>). Yet the goat was
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
neither sacrificed to her as a rule, nor allowed to enter her
great sanctuary, the Acropolis at Athens. The reason
alleged for this was that the goat injured the olive, the
sacred tree of Athena.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, xiii. 51, p. 587 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>;
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 204. Compare
W. Robertson Smith, in <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>, Ninth Edition, article
<q>Sacrifice,</q> vol. xxi. p. 135.</note> So far, therefore, the relation of
the goat of Athena is parallel to the relation of the horse
to Virbius, both animals being excluded from the sanctuary
on the ground of injury done by them to the god. But
from Varro we learn that there was an exception to the
rule which excluded the goat from the Acropolis. Once a
year, he says, the goat was driven on to the Acropolis for a
necessary sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cultura</hi>, i. 2. 19
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hoc nomine etiam Athenis in
arcem non inigi, praeterquam semel ad
necessarium sacrificium.</foreign></q> By <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>semel</foreign>
Varro probably means once a year.</note> Now, as has been remarked before,
when an animal is sacrificed once and once only in the year,
it is probably slain, not as a victim offered to the god, but
as a representative of the god himself. Therefore we may
infer that if a goat was sacrificed on the Acropolis once a
year, it was sacrificed in the character of Athena herself;<note place='foot'>The force of this inference is
greatly weakened, if not destroyed, by
a fact which I had overlooked when I
wrote this book originally. A goat was
sacrificed to Brauronian Artemis at her
festival called the Brauronia (Hesychius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Βραυρωνίοις; compare Im. Bekker's
<hi rend='italic'>Anecdota Graeca</hi>, p. 445, lines 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).
As the Brauronian Artemis had a sanctuary
on the Acropolis of Athens (Pausanias,
i. 23. 7), it seems probable that
the goat sacrificed once a year on the
Acropolis was sacrificed to her and not
to Athena. (Note to Second Edition
of <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>.)</note>
and it may be conjectured that the skin of the sacrificed
animal was placed on the statue of the goddess and formed
the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>aegis</foreign>, which would thus be renewed annually. Similarly
at Thebes in Egypt rams were sacred and were not sacrificed.
But on one day in the year a ram was killed, and
its skin was placed on the statue of the god Ammon.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 42.</note> Now,
if we knew the ritual of the Arician grove better, we might
find that the rule of excluding horses from it, like the rule
of excluding goats from the Acropolis at Athens, was
subject to an annual exception, a horse being once a year
taken into the grove and sacrificed as an embodiment of the
god Virbius.<note place='foot'>It is worth noting that Hippolytus,
with whom Virbius was identified, is
said to have dedicated horses to Aesculapius,
who had raised him from the
dead (Pausanias, ii. 27. 4).</note> By the usual misunderstanding the horse
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
thus killed would come in time to be regarded as an enemy
offered up in sacrifice to the god whom he had injured, like
the pig which was sacrificed to Demeter and Osiris or the
goat which was sacrificed to Dionysus, and possibly to
Athena. It is so easy for a writer to record a rule without
noticing an exception that we need not wonder at finding
the rule of the Arician grove recorded without any mention
of an exception such as I suppose. If we had had only the
statements of Athenaeus and Pliny, we should have known
only the rule which forbade the sacrifice of goats to Athena
and excluded them from the Acropolis, without being aware
of the important exception which the fortunate preservation
of Varro's work has revealed to us.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
sacrifice of
a horse at
Rome in
October.</note>
The conjecture that once a year a horse may have been
sacrificed in the Arician grove as a representative of the
deity of the grove derives some support from the similar
sacrifice of a horse which took place once a year at Rome.
On the fifteenth of October in each year a chariot-race was
run on the Field of Mars. Stabbed with a spear, the right-hand
horse of the victorious team was then sacrificed to
Mars for the purpose of ensuring good crops, and its head
was cut off and adorned with a string of loaves. Thereupon
the inhabitants of two wards&mdash;the Sacred Way and the
Subura&mdash;contended with each other who should get the
head. If the people of the Sacred Way got it, they fastened
it to a wall of the king's house; if the people of the Subura
got it, they fastened it to the Mamilian tower. The
horse's tail was cut off and carried to the king's house with
such speed that the blood dripped on the hearth of the
house.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. C. O. Müller, pp. 178,
179, 220; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Romanae</hi>,
97; Polybius, xii. 4 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>. The
sacrifice is referred to by Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi>
v. p. 176 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi> (p. 228 ed. F. C. Hertlein).
It is the subject of a valuable essay by
W. Mannhardt, whose conclusions I
summarise in the text. See W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1884), pp. 156-201.</note> Further, it appears that the blood of the horse was
caught and preserved till the twenty-first of April, when the
Vestal virgins mixed it with the blood of the unborn calves
which had been sacrificed six days before. The mixture
was then distributed to shepherds, and used by them for
fumigating their flocks.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 731 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, compare
629 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Propertius, v. 1. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The horse
so sacrificed
seems
to have embodied
the
corn-spirit.</note>
In this ceremony the decoration of the horse's head<note place='foot'>The Huzuls of the Carpathians
attribute a special virtue to a horse's
head. They think that fastened on a
pole and set up in a garden it protects
the cabbages from caterpillars. See R.
F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi> (Wienna, 1894),
p. 102. At the close of the rice-harvest
the Garos of Assam celebrate a festival
in which the effigy of a horse plays an
important part. When the festival is
over, the body of the horse is thrown
into a stream, but the head is preserved
for another year. See Note at the end
of the volume.</note>
with a string of loaves, and the alleged object of the sacrifice,
namely, to procure a good harvest, seem to indicate that
the horse was killed as one of those animal representatives
of the corn-spirit of which we have found so many examples.
The custom of cutting off the horse's tail is like the African
custom of cutting off the tails of the oxen and sacrificing them
to obtain a good crop.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In both the Roman and the African
custom the animal apparently stands for the corn-spirit, and
its fructifying power is supposed to reside especially in its
tail. The latter idea occurs, as we have seen, in European
folk-lore.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 268, 272.</note> Again, the practice of fumigating the cattle in
spring with the blood of the horse may be compared with
the practice of giving the Old Wife, the Maiden, or the
<foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign> sheaf as fodder to the horses in spring or the cattle
at Christmas, and giving the Yule Boar to the ploughing
oxen or horses to eat in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 141, 155, 156,
158, 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 301.</note> All these usages aim at
ensuring the blessing of the corn-spirit on the homestead
and its inmates and storing it up for another year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Archaic
character of
the sacrifice
and its
analogies
in the
harvest
customs of
Northern
Europe.</note>
The Roman sacrifice of the October horse, as it was
called, carries us back to the early days when the Subura,
afterwards a low and squalid quarter of the great metropolis,
was still a separate village, whose inhabitants engaged in a
friendly contest on the harvest-field with their neighbours
of Rome, then a little rural town. The Field of Mars on
which the ceremony took place lay beside the Tiber, and
formed part of the king's domain down to the abolition
of the monarchy. For tradition ran that at the time
when the last of the kings was driven from Rome, the
corn stood ripe for the sickle on the crown lands beside the
river; but no one would eat the accursed grain and it was
flung into the river in such heaps that, the water being low
with the summer heat, it formed the nucleus of an island.<note place='foot'>Livy, ii. 5.</note>
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
The horse sacrifice was thus an old autumn custom observed
upon the king's corn-fields at the end of the harvest. The
tail and blood of the horse, as the chief parts of the corn-spirit's
representative, were taken to the king's house and
kept there; just as in Germany the harvest-cock is nailed
on the gable or over the door of the farmhouse; and as the
last sheaf, in the form of the Maiden, is carried home and
kept over the fireplace in the Highlands of Scotland. Thus
the blessing of the corn-spirit was brought to the king's
house and hearth and, through them, to the community of
which he was the head. Similarly in the spring and
autumn customs of Northern Europe the Maypole is sometimes
set up in front of the house of the mayor or burgomaster,
and the last sheaf at harvest is brought to him as
the head of the village. But while the tail and blood fell to
the king, the neighbouring village of the Subura, which no
doubt once had a similar ceremony of its own, was gratified
by being allowed to compete for the prize of the horse's
head. The Mamilian tower, to which the Suburans nailed
the horse's head when they succeeded in carrying it off,
appears to have been a peel-tower or keep of the old
Mamilian family, the magnates of the village.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. C. O. Müller, pp. 130, 131.</note> The
ceremony thus performed on the king's fields and at his
house on behalf of the whole town and of the neighbouring
village presupposes a time when each township performed a
similar ceremony on its own fields. In the rural districts
of Latium the villages may have continued to observe the
custom, each on its own land, long after the Roman hamlets
had merged their separate harvest-homes in the common
celebration on the king's lands. There is no intrinsic
improbability in the supposition that the sacred grove of
Aricia, like the Field of Mars at Rome, may have been the
scene of a common harvest celebration, at which a horse was
sacrificed with the same rude rites on behalf of the neighbouring
villages. The horse would represent the fructifying
spirit both of the tree and of the corn, for the two ideas melt
into each other, as we see in customs like the Harvest-May.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other examples
of
the exclusion
of
horses from
sanctuaries. Uncertainty
as to
the reason
for excluding
horses
from the
Arician
grove.</note>
However, it should be borne in mind that the evidence
for thus interpreting the relation of horses to Virbius is
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
exceedingly slender, and that the custom of excluding
horses from the sacred Arician grove may have been
based on some other superstitious motive which entirely
escapes us. At the city of Ialysus in Rhodes there was a
sanctuary of Alectrona, one of the daughters of the Sun,
into which no horse, ass, mule, or beast of burden of any
kind might enter. Any person who broke the law by introducing
one of these animals into the holy precinct, had to
purify the place by a sacrifice; and the same atonement had
to be made by any man who brought shoes or any portion
of a pig within the sacred boundaries. And whoever drove
or suffered his sheep to stray into the precinct was obliged
to pay a fine of one obol for every sheep that set foot
in it.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 560 (vol. ii. pp. 259-261);
Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi> (Brussels, 1900), No.
434, pp. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P. Cauer, <hi rend='italic'>Delectus
Inscriptionum Graecarum propter dialectum
memorabilium</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic, 1883),
No. 177, pp. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to Alectrona
or Alectryona, daughter of the Sun,
see Diodorus Siculus, v. 65. 5.</note> The reasons for these prohibitions are quite unknown;
and the taboo on horses is particularly remarkable,
since the Rhodians were in the habit of offering a chariot
and horses every year to the Sun, the father of Alectrona,<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>October equus,</q> p.
181 ed. C. O. Müller. See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic
Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i.
315.</note>
doubtless in order that he might ride on them through the sky.
Did they think that it was not for the daughter of the Sun
to meddle with horses, which were the peculiar property of
her father? The conjecture may perhaps be supported by
an analogy drawn from West Africa. The Ewe negroes of the
Slave Coast conceive the Rain-god Nyikplã as a man who
rides a horse, and who may be seen galloping on it through
the sky in the form of a shooting star. Hence in the town
of Angla, where he generally resides when he is at home, no
person may appear on horseback in the streets, that being
apparently regarded as an impious usurpation of the style of
the deity. In former days even Europeans were forbidden
to ride on horseback in Angla; and missionaries who
attempted to set the local prejudice at defiance have been
pelted with sticks and dirt by the outraged natives.<note place='foot'>G. Zündel, <q>Land und Volk der
Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in West-afrika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Erdkunde zu
Berlin</hi>, xii. (1877) pp. 415 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Another deity who suffered not horses to enter his sacred
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
place was Rakelimalaza, a Malagasy god whose name
signifies <q>renowned, although diminutive.</q> His residence
was a village situated on the top of a hill about seven miles
east of Tananarivo. But horses were not the only animal
or thing to which this fastidious being entertained a rooted
aversion. <q>Within the limits of the ground which is considered
sacred, and which embraces a wide circumference in
the immediate vicinity of the idol's residence, it is strictly
forbidden to bring, or to suffer to come, certain animals and
certain objects, which are carefully specified by the keepers
of the idol. Things thus forbidden are called <foreign rend='italic'>fady</foreign>; a term
of similar import with the well-known tabu of the South
Sea Islands. Every idol has its own particular <foreign rend='italic'>fady</foreign>. The
things prohibited by Rakelimalaza are, guns, gunpowder,
pigs, onions, sifotra (a shell-fish resembling a snail), sitry (a
small animal resembling the young crocodile), striped or
spotted robes, anything of a black colour, goats, horses, meat
distributed at funerals or at the <foreign rend='italic'>tangena</foreign>, and cats and owls.
Its keepers are forbidden to enter any house where there is
a corpse; and in crossing a river they are not permitted to
say, <q>Carry me,</q> otherwise they place themselves in danger
of being seized by the crocodiles; and in war they must not
talk, or they are in danger of being shot.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of Madagascar</hi>
(London, preface dated 1838),
i. 402 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> To attempt to
discover the particular reasons for all these numerous and
varied taboos would obviously be futile; many of them may
be based on accidental circumstances which for us are lost
past recovery. But it may be worth while to observe that
a variety of taboos was enforced at other ancient Greek
shrines besides the sanctuary of Alectrona at Ialysus. For
example, no person was allowed to enter the sanctuary of
the Mistress at Lycosura in Arcadia clad in black, purple,
or flowered vestments, or wearing shoes or a ring, or with
his or her hair plaited or covered, or carrying flowers in
his hand;<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 939 (vol. ii.
p. 803).</note> and no pomegranates might be brought into the
sanctuary, though all other fruits of the orchard were free to
enter.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 37. 7.</note> These instances may warn us against the danger of
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
arguing too confidently in favour of any one of the many
possible reasons which may have moved the old Latins to
exclude horses from the sacred Arician grove. The domain
of primitive superstition, in spite of the encroachments of
science, is indeed still to a great extent a trackless wilderness,
a tangled maze, in the gloomy recesses of which the
forlorn explorer may wander for ever without a light and
without a clue.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. Eating The God.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Sacrament of First-Fruits.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Sacrament of First-Fruits.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom of
eating the
new corn
sacramentally
as the
body of the
corn-spirit.
Loaves
baked of
the new
corn in
human
shape and
eaten.</note>
We have now seen that the corn-spirit is represented sometimes
in human, sometimes in animal form, and that in both
cases he is killed in the person of his representative and
eaten sacramentally. To find examples of actually killing
the human representative of the corn-spirit we had naturally
to go to savage races; but the harvest-suppers of our
European peasants have furnished unmistakable examples
of the sacramental eating of animals as representatives of
the corn-spirit. But further, as might have been anticipated,
the new corn is itself eaten sacramentally, that is, as the
body of the corn-spirit. In Wermland, Sweden, the farmer's
wife uses the grain of the last sheaf to bake a loaf in
the shape of a little girl; this loaf is divided amongst the
whole household and eaten by them.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi> (Strasburg, 1884), p. 179.</note> Here the loaf
represents the corn-spirit conceived as a maiden; just as in
Scotland the corn-spirit is similarly conceived and represented
by the last sheaf made up in the form of a woman
and bearing the name of the Maiden. As usual, the corn-spirit
is believed to reside in the last sheaf; and to eat a
loaf made from the last sheaf is, therefore, to eat the corn-spirit
itself. Similarly at La Palisse, in France, a man made
of dough is hung upon the fir-tree which is carried on the
last harvest-waggon. The tree and the dough-man are
taken to the mayor's house and kept there till the vintage
is over. Then the close of the harvest is celebrated by a
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
feast at which the mayor breaks the dough-man in pieces
and gives the pieces to the people to eat.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus
der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1875), p. 205. It is
not said that the dough-man is made of
the new corn; but probably this is,
or once was, the case.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Old Lithuanian
ritual
at eating
the new
corn.</note>
In these examples the corn-spirit is represented and
eaten in human shape. In other cases, though the new
corn is not baked in loaves of human shape, still the solemn
ceremonies with which it is eaten suffice to indicate that it
is partaken of sacramentally, that is, as the body of the
corn-spirit. For example, the following ceremonies used
to be observed by Lithuanian peasants at eating the
new corn. About the time of the autumn sowing, when
all the corn had been got in and the threshing had begun,
each farmer held a festival called Sabarios, that is,
<q>the mixing or throwing together.</q> He took nine good
handfuls of each kind of crop&mdash;wheat, barley, oats, flax,
beans, lentils, and the rest; and each handful he divided into
three parts. The twenty-seven portions of each grain were
then thrown on a heap and all mixed up together. The grain
used had to be that which was first threshed and winnowed
and which had been set aside and kept for this purpose. A
part of the grain thus mixed was employed to bake little
loaves, one for each of the household; the rest was mixed
with more barley or oats and made into beer. The first beer
brewed from this mixture was for the drinking of the farmer,
his wife, and children; the second brew was for the servants.
The beer being ready, the farmer chose an evening when
no stranger was expected. Then he knelt down before the
barrel of beer, drew a jugful of the liquor and poured it on
the bung of the barrel, saying, <q>O fruitful earth, make rye
and barley and all kinds of corn to flourish.</q> Next he took
the jug to the parlour, where his wife and children awaited
him. On the floor of the parlour lay bound a black or white
or speckled (not a red) cock and a hen of the same colour and
of the same brood, which must have been hatched within the
year. Then the farmer knelt down, with the jug in his hand,
and thanked God for the harvest and prayed for a good crop
next year. Next all lifted up their hands and said, <q>O
God, and thou, O earth, we give you this cock and hen as
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
a free-will offering.</q> With that the farmer killed the fowls
with the blows of a wooden spoon, for he might not cut
their heads off. After the first prayer and after killing each
of the birds he poured out a third of the beer. Then his
wife boiled the fowls in a new pot which had never been
used before. After that, a bushel was set, bottom upwards,
on the floor, and on it were placed the little loaves mentioned
above and the boiled fowls. Next the new beer was fetched,
together with a ladle and three mugs, none of which was
used except on this occasion. When the farmer had ladled
the beer into the mugs, the family knelt down round the
bushel. The father then uttered a prayer and drank off the
three mugs of beer. The rest followed his example. Then
the loaves and the flesh of the fowls were eaten, after which
the beer went round again, till every one had emptied each
of the three mugs nine times. None of the food should
remain over; but if anything did happen to be left, it was
consumed next morning with the same ceremonies. The
bones were given to the dog to eat; if he did not eat
them all up, the remains were buried under the dung in the
cattle-stall. This ceremony was observed at the beginning
of December. On the day on which it took place no bad
word might be spoken.<note place='foot'>M. Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae
oder Preussische Schaubuhne, im
wörtlichen Auszüge aus dem Manuscript
herausgegeben</hi> von Dr. William
Pierson (Berlin, 1871), pp. 60-64; W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>
(Berlin, 1877), pp. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Mathaeus Praetorius, the author to
whom we owe the account in the text,
compiled a detailed description of old
Lithuanian manners and customs in
the latter part of the seventeenth
century at the village of Niebudzen,
of which he was Protestant pastor.
The work, which seems to have occupied
him for many years and to have
been finished about 1698, exists in
manuscript but has never been published
in full. Only excerpts from it
have been printed by Dr. W. Pierson.
Praetorius was born at Memel about
1635 and died in 1707. In the later
years of his life he incurred a good
deal of odium by joining the Catholic
Church.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Modern
European
ceremonies
at eating
the new
corn or new
potatoes.</note>
Such was the custom about two hundred years or more
ago. At the present day in Lithuania, when new potatoes or
loaves made from the new corn are being eaten, all the people
at table pull each other's hair.<note place='foot'>A. Bezzenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Litauische Forschungen</hi>
(Göttingen, 1882), p. 89.</note> The meaning of this last
custom is obscure, but a similar custom was certainly
observed by the heathen Lithuanians at their solemn
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
sacrifices.<note place='foot'>Simon Grunau, <hi rend='italic'>Preussischer
Chronik</hi>, herausgegeben von Dr. M.
Perlbach, i. (Leipsic, 1876) p. 91.</note> Many of the Esthonians of the island of Oesel will
not eat bread baked of the new corn till they have first
taken a bite at a piece of iron.<note place='foot'>J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. Heft 2
(Dorpat, 1872), p. 108.</note> The iron is here plainly a
charm, intended to render harmless the spirit that is in the
corn.<note place='foot'>On iron as a charm against spirits,
see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp.
232 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In Sutherlandshire at the present day, when the
new potatoes are dug all the family must taste them, otherwise
<q>the spirits in them [the potatoes] take offence, and the
potatoes would not keep.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. (1889)
p. 54.</note> In one part of Yorkshire it is
still customary for the clergyman to cut the first corn; and
my informant believes that the corn so cut is used to make
the communion bread.<note place='foot'>Communicated by the Rev. J. J.
C. Yarborough, of Chislehurst, Kent.
See <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) p. 50.</note> If the latter part of the custom is
correctly reported (and analogy is all in its favour), it shews
how the Christian communion has absorbed within itself a
sacrament which is doubtless far older than Christianity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
of the
heathen
Cheremiss
at eating
the new
corn.</note>
Among the heathen Cheremiss on the left bank of the
Volga, when the first bread baked from the new corn is to
be eaten, the villagers assemble in the house of the oldest
inhabitant, the eastern door is opened, and all pray with
their faces towards it. Then the sorcerer or priest gives to
each of them a mug of beer, which they drain; next he cuts
and hands to every person a morsel of the loaf, which they
partake of. Finally, the young people go to the elders and
bowing down to the earth before them say, <q>We pray God
that you may live, and that God may let us pray next year
for new corn.</q> The rest of the day is passed in mirth and
dancing. The whole ceremony, observes the writer who has
described it, looks almost like a caricature of the Eucharist.<note place='foot'>Von Haxthausen, <hi rend='italic'>Studien über die
innern Zustände, das Volksleben und
insbesondere die ländliche Einrichtungen
Russlands</hi>, i. 448 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
According to another account, each Cheremiss householder
on this occasion, after bathing, places some of each kind of
grain, together with malt, cakes, and drink, in a vessel, which
he holds up to the sun, at the same time thanking the gods
for the good things which they have bestowed upon him.<note place='foot'>J. G. Georgi, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung aller
Nationen des Russischen Reichs</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1776), p. 37.</note>
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
But this part of the ceremony is a sacrifice rather than a
sacrament of the new corn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
of the Aino
at eating
the new
millet.</note>
The Aino or Ainu of Japan are said to distinguish
various kinds of millet as male and female respectively, and
these kinds, taken together, are called <q>the divine husband and
wife cereal</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Umurek haru kamui</foreign>). <q>Therefore before millet
is pounded and made into cakes for general eating, the old
men have a few made for themselves first to worship. When
they are ready they pray to them very earnestly and say:&mdash;<q>O
thou cereal deity, we worship thee. Thou hast grown
very well this year, and thy flavour will be sweet. Thou
art good. The goddess of fire will be glad, and we also
shall rejoice greatly. O thou god, O thou divine cereal,
do thou nourish the people. I now partake of thee. I
worship thee and give thee thanks.</q> After having thus
prayed, they, the worshippers, take a cake and eat it, and from
this time the people may all partake of the new millet.
And so with many gestures of homage and words of prayer
this kind of food is dedicated to the well-being of the Ainu.
No doubt the cereal offering is regarded as a tribute paid
to god, but that god is no other than the seed itself; and it
is only a god in so far as it is beneficial to the human body.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), pp.
204, 206.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
of the
Melanesians
of Reef
Island at
eating the
new bread-fruits
and yams.</note>
The natives of the Reef Islands in Melanesia describe as
follows the ceremonies which they observe at eating new
fruits: <q>When the fruit of trees that are eatable, such as
bread-fruit, or <foreign rend='italic'>ninas</foreign> (nuts) is nearly ripe, about a month
before the time that people eat it, they all go together into
the bush. They must all go together for this <q>holy eating,</q>
and when they return they all assemble in one place, and no
one will be absent; they sit down and cook bread-fruit.
While it is being cooked no one will eat beforehand, but
they set it in order and cook it with reverence, and with the
belief that the spirit has granted that food to them and they
return thanks to him for it. When it is cooked a certain
man takes a bread-fruit and climbs up a tree, and all the
people stand on the ground and they all look up, and when
he has reached the top they shout out, and when they have
shouted they call out, <q>This is the bread-fruit of the whole
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
land</q>; then he throws down the bread-fruit and they pick
it up and shout out again and give thanks, for they think
that the spirit who protects the fruit will hear. Their
thoughts are thus also with regard to the yam, there is no
difference, it is all the same; they think that a spirit gives
them food, and the people assemble together and thank the
spirit. In every island they think that there is a spirit
presiding over food.</q><note place='foot'><q>Native Stories from Santa Cruz
and Reef Islands,</q> translated by the
Rev. W. O'Ferrall, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxiv. (1904)
p. 230.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
of the New
Caledonians
at eating
the first
yams.</note>
At Bourail, in New Caledonia, the eating of the first
yams of the season is a solemn ceremony. The women
may take no part in it; indeed for five days previously they
may not even shew themselves on any pretext, and must
hide in the forest. But the men of other tribes are invited
to share in the festivity. On the day of the ceremony seven
or eight yams are dug up with the greatest precaution, wrapt
in leaves, and carried before the great wooden images, ten
or twelve feet high, rudely carved in human form and painted
black, red, and white, which represent the ancestors of the
tribe. Special pots, only used on these occasions, are then
disinterred by boys, who cook the new yams in them, eat
them, and afterwards bury the pots in the places where they
found them. Thereupon the chief or the oldest man mounts
a ladder and addresses the crowd in a long and voluble
harangue, telling them how their forefathers always respected
the feast of the first yams, and exhorting the young men of
the tribe to do the same in the time to come. After that,
turning towards the ancestral images, he prays them to give
a good crop of yams every year to the people and their
descendants, adjuring them to remember how, while they were
still on earth, they always ate to their heart's content, and
beseeching them to reflect that their sons and grandsons
naturally desire to do the same. When the orator has
finished his discourse, and his hearers have signified their
approval of his eloquence by a loud grunt, the new yams are
dressed and eaten, each family cooking them in a pot of its
own.<note place='foot'>Glaumont, <q>La culture de
l'igname et du taro en Nouvelle-Calédonie,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>L'Anthropologie</hi>, viii.
(1897) pp. 43-45.</note>
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed at
eating the
new rice in
Buru and
Celebes.</note>
At the close of the rice harvest in the East Indian island
of Buru, each clan (<foreign rend='italic'>fenna</foreign>) meets at a common sacramental
meal, to which every member of the clan is bound to contribute
a little of the new rice. This meal is called <q>eating the soul
of the rice,</q> a name which clearly indicates the sacramental
character of the repast. Some of the rice is also set apart
and offered to the spirits.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland
Boeroe,</q> p. 26 (<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi> vol. xxxviii.,
Batavia, 1875).</note> Amongst the Alfoors of Minahassa,
in the north of Celebes, the priest sows the first
rice-seed and plucks the first ripe rice in each field. This
rice he roasts and grinds into meal, and gives some of
it to each of the household.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
vii. (1863) p. 127.</note> Shortly before the rice-harvest
in Bolang Mongondo, another district of Celebes, an
offering is made of a small pig or a fowl. Then the priest
plucks a little rice, first on his own field and next on those
of his neighbours. All the rice thus plucked by him he
dries along with his own, and then gives it back to the
respective owners, who have it ground and boiled. When it
is boiled the women take it back, with an egg, to the priest,
who offers the egg in sacrifice and returns the rice to the
women. Of this rice every member of the family, down to
the youngest child, must partake. After this ceremony
every one is free to get in his rice.<note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) pp. 369 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed at
eating the
new rice in
Ceram and
Borneo.</note>
On the north coast of Ceram every owner of a rice-field
begins planting by making six holes in the middle of the
field and depositing rice-seed in them. When the crop is
ripe, the rice which has sprouted from these six holes must
be the first to be reaped and the first to be eaten by the
owner at the common harvest-feast of the village. When all
the owners of the fields have thus partaken of the rice that
was first planted and first reaped in their fields, the other
villagers may help themselves to rice out of the pot. Not
till this feast has been held may the owners of rice-fields sell
their rice.<note place='foot'>J. Boot, <q>Korte schets der noordkust
van Ceram,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tiidschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, x. (1893) pp.
671 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Kayans of Central Borneo, who, as
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
we have seen, believe rice to be animated by a soul,<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 184 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> before
a family partakes of the new rice at harvest, a priestess must
touch the face and breast of every person with a magical
instrument (<foreign rend='italic'>kahe parei</foreign>) consisting of the husk of a certain
fruit adorned with strings of beads. After this ceremony has
been performed on every member of the family, he or she
eats a few grains of the new rice and drinks a little water.
When all have complied with this ritual, the feast begins.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1900), i. 156; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1904-1907),
i. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the latter passage
<q><foreign rend='italic'>ist jeder</foreign></q> is a misprint for <q><foreign rend='italic'>isst
jeder</foreign></q>; the Dutch original is <q><foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>eet ieder</foreign>.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed at
eating the
new rice in
India.</note>
Amongst the Burghers or Badagas, a tribe of the
Neilgherry Hills in Southern India, the first handful of seed
is sown and the first sheaf reaped by a Curumbar&mdash;a man
of a different tribe, the members of which the Burghers
regard as sorcerers. The grain contained in the first
sheaf <q>is that day reduced to meal, made into cakes,
and, being offered as a first-fruit oblation, is, together
with the remainder of the sacrificed animal, partaken of by
the Burgher and the whole of his family, as the meat of a
federal offering and sacrifice.</q><note place='foot'>H. Harkness, <hi rend='italic'>Description of a
Singular Aboriginal Race inhabiting
the Summit of the Neilgherry Hills</hi>
(London, 1832), pp. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Coorgs of
Southern India the man who is to cut the first sheaf of rice
at harvest is chosen by an astrologer. At sunset the whole
household takes a hot bath and then goes to the rice-field,
where the chosen reaper cuts an armful of rice with a new
sickle, and distributes two or more stalks to all present.
Then all return to the threshing-floor. A bundle of leaves
is adorned with a stalk of rice and fastened to the post in
the centre of the threshing-floor. Enough of the new rice is
now threshed, cleaned, and ground to provide flour for the
dough-cakes which each member of the household is to eat.
Then they go to the door of the house, where the mistress
washes the feet of the sheaf-cutter, and presents to him, and
after him to all the rest, a brass vessel full of milk, honey,
and sugar, from which each person takes a draught. Next
the man who cut the sheaf kneads a cake of rice-meal,
plantains, milk, honey, seven new rice corns, seven pieces
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
of coco-nut, and so on. Every one receives a little of
his cake on an Ashvatha leaf, and eats it. The ceremony
is then over and the sheaf-cutter mixes with the
company. When he was engaged in cutting the rice no
one might touch him.<note place='foot'>Ch. E. Gover, <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-songs of
Southern India</hi> (London, 1872), pp.
105 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <q>Coorg Folklore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) pp. 302 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Among the Hindoos of Southern
India the eating of the new rice is the occasion of a family
festival called Pongol. The new rice is boiled in a new
pot on a fire which is kindled at noon on the day when,
according to Hindoo astrologers, the sun enters the tropic
of Capricorn. The boiling of the pot is watched with
great anxiety by the whole family, for as the milk boils, so
will the coming year be. If the milk boils rapidly, the
year will be prosperous; but it will be the reverse if the
milk boils slowly. Some of the new boiled rice is offered
to the image of Gaṇeṣa; then every one partakes of it.<note place='foot'>Gover, <q>The Pongol Festival in
Southern India,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society</hi>, N.S., v. (1871) pp.
91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
In some parts of Northern India the festival of the new
crop is known as <foreign rend='italic'>Navan</foreign>, that is, <q>new grain.</q> When the
crop is ripe, the owner takes the omens, goes to the field,
plucks five or six ears of barley in the spring crop and one
of the millets in the autumn harvest. This is brought home,
parched, and mixed with coarse sugar, butter, and curds.
Some of it is thrown on the fire in the name of the village
gods and deceased ancestors; the rest is eaten by the
family.<note place='foot'>From notes sent to me by my
friend Mr. W. Crooke.</note> At Gilgit, in the Hindoo Koosh, before wheat-harvest
begins, a member of every household gathers a
handful of ears of corn secretly at dusk. A few of the
ears are hung up over the door of the house, and the rest
are roasted next morning, and eaten steeped in milk. The
day is spent in rejoicings, and next morning the harvest
begins.<note place='foot'>Major J. Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the
Hindoo Koosh</hi> (Calcutta, 1880), p. 103.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Chams at
ploughing,
sowing,
reaping,
and eating
the new
rice.</note>
The Chams of Binh-Thuan, in Indo-China, may not reap
the rice-harvest until they have offered the first-fruits to
Po-Nagar, the goddess of agriculture, and have consumed
them sacramentally. These first-fruits are gathered from
certain sacred fields called <foreign rend='italic'>Hamou-Klêk-Laoa</foreign> or <q>fields of
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
secret tillage,</q> which are both sown and reaped with
peculiar ceremonies. Apparently the tilling of the earth
is considered a crime which must be perpetrated secretly
and afterwards atoned for. On a lucky day in June, at
the first cock-crow, two men lead the buffaloes and the
plough to the sacred field, round which they draw three
furrows in profound silence and then retire. Afterwards at
dawn the owner of the land comes lounging by, as if by the
merest chance. At sight of the furrows he stops, pretends
to be much surprised, and cries out, <q>Who has been secretly
ploughing my field this night?</q> Hastening home, he kills
a kid or some fowls, cooks the victuals, and prepares five
quids of betel, some candles, a flask of oil, and lustral
water of three different sorts. With these offerings and
the plough drawn by the buffaloes, he returns to the field,
where he lights the candles and spreading out the victuals
worships Po-Nagar and the other deities, saying: <q>I know
not who has secretly ploughed my field this night. Pardon,
ye gods, those who have done this wrong. Accept these
offerings. Bless us. Suffer us to proceed with this work.</q>
Then, speaking in the name of the deities, he gives the
reassuring answer, <q>All right. Plough away!</q> With
the lustral water he washes or sprinkles the buffaloes, the
yoke, and the plough. The oil serves to anoint the plough
and to pour libations on the ground. The five quids of
betel are buried in the field. Thereupon the owner sows a
handful of rice on the three furrows that have been traced,
and eats the victuals with his people. After all these rites
have been duly performed, he may plough and sow his
land as he likes. When the rice has grown high enough in
this <q>field of secret tillage</q> to hide pigeons, offerings of
ducks, eggs, and fowls are made to the deities; and fresh
offerings, which generally consist of five plates of rice, two
boiled fowls, a bottle of spirits, and five quids of betel, are
made to Po-Nagar and the rest at the time when the rice
is in bloom. Finally, when the rice in <q>the field of secret
tillage</q> is ripe, it has to be reaped before any of the rest.
Offerings of food, such as boiled fowls, plates of rice, cakes,
and so forth, are spread out on the field; a candle is lit,
and a priest or, in his absence, the owner prays to the
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
guardian deities to come and partake of the food set before
them. After that the owner of the land cuts three stalks
of rice with a sickle in the middle of the field, then he cuts
three handfuls at the side, and places the whole in a napkin.
These are the first-fruits offered to Po-Nagar, the goddess
of agriculture. On being taken home the rice from the
three handfuls is husked, pounded in a mortar, and presented
to the goddess with these words: <q>Taste, O goddess, these
first-fruits which have just been reaped.</q> This rice is
afterwards eaten, while the straw and husks are burned.
Having eaten the first-fruits of the rice, the owner takes the
three stalks cut in the middle of the field, passes them
through the smoke of the precious eagle-wood, and hangs
them up in his house, where they remain till the next
sowing-time comes round. The grain from these three
stalks will form the seed of the three furrows in <q>the field
of secret tillage.</q> Not till these ceremonies have been
performed is the proprietor at liberty to reap the rest of
that field and all the others.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <q>Les Tchames et
leurs religions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'histoire des
Religions</hi>, xxiv. (1891) pp. 272-274.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
at eating
the new
yams at
Onitsha on
the Niger.</note>
The ceremony of eating the new yams at Onitsha, on
the Niger, is thus described: <q>Each headman brought out
six yams, and cut down young branches of palm-leaves and
placed them before his gate, roasted three of the yams,
and got some kola-nuts and fish. After the yam is roasted,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Libia</foreign>, or country doctor, takes the yam, scrapes it
into a sort of meal, and divides it into halves; he then
takes one piece, and places it on the lips of the person who
is going to eat the new yam. The eater then blows up
the steam from the hot yam, and afterwards pokes the
whole into his mouth, and says, <q>I thank God for being
permitted to eat the new yam</q>; he then begins to chew it
heartily, with fish likewise.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>
(London, 1859), pp. 287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr.
Taylor's information is repeated in
<hi rend='italic'>West African Countries and Peoples</hi>,
by J. Africanus B. Horton (London,
1868), pp. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
at eating
the new
yams
among
the Ewe
negroes of
Togoland.</note>
Among the Ewe negroes of West Africa the eating of the
new yams is the greatest festival of the year; it usually falls
at the beginning of September, and its character is predominantly
religious. We possess a native account of the festival
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
as it is celebrated by the tribe of the Hos in Togoland.
When the yams are ripe and ready to be dug up and brought
home, two days are devoted to cleansing the town of all ills,
whether spiritual or material, as a solemn preparation for the
ensuing celebration. When these rites of purification, which
will be described in a later part of this work, have been
accomplished, then, in the words of the native account, <q rend='pre'>the
people make ready to eat the new yams. And the manner
of making ready consists in going to the fields and digging
the yams. However, they do not bring them home but lay
them down somewhere on the way. The reason why they
do not bring them home is that the people have not yet been
on the place where they sacrifice to the deity. When they
wish to go thither, the way to the sacrificial place of Agbasia
must first be cleared of grass. Afterwards the people come
with their drums, which they beat loudly. When they are
come to the place of sacrifice, they first raise two great
mounds of earth, and they bring to the place of sacrifice
palm wine, uncooked and cooked yams, and meal mixed
with oil. First of all the uncooked yams are cut in two
through the middle, and then this prayer is offered: <q>Agbasia,
thou art he who has given the yams; therefore here is thine
own! We thank thee sincerely. May the eating of the
yams be a great joy, and may no quarrel intervene!</q> Thereupon
they lay down on the ground yams mixed with oil and
not mixed with oil. In doing so they say to Agbasia, <q>He
who eats not the white yams, to him belong the yams mixed
with oil; and he who eats not the yams mixed with oil, to
him belong the white yams.</q> They do the same with the
meal that is mixed with oil and with the meal that is not
mixed with oil. Thereby they say: <q>Here we bring thee all
that thou hast given us. Eat thereof what thou pleasest!</q>
After that they pour palm wine into one pot and water into
another, and say, <q>When one has eaten, one drinks water.</q>
Thereby the drums sound, songs are sung, and the priest says:
<q>Our father Agbasia, we pray thee, let us hear no more evil
but good only! When women are with child, let them bear
twins and triplets, that we may increase and multiply!
When the time for sowing the yams comes again, make it to
rain upon them even more than hitherto, in order that we
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
may come again and thank thee more sincerely than hitherto!</q>
Thereupon the priest pours water on one of the mounds,
makes a paste with it, and calls the people thither. Then
he dips his finger in the slime and smears it on their brows,
temples, and breasts, saying, <q>This is the slime of Agbasia,
wherewith I smear you, that ye may remain in life.</q> After
that they disperse and go home.</q> Further, the prayers and
offerings of the individual peasants on the occasion of the
yam festival are described as follows. <q>In the evening, when
the town is swept clean, the people go to the fields to fetch
yams, which, however, they may not yet bring into the town
and therefore they hide them in the forest. As soon as the
high priest quits the town next morning to go to the
sacrificial place of his god, the women set out to fetch the
yams which they had deposited. Now they begin to cook.
Many people kill fowls or goats, and others buy fish for the
festival. When the yams are sodden, a little is broken off,
mixed with oil, and laid, together with uncooked yams, on
the ground at the entrance to the homestead. Thereby the
house-father says: <q>That belongs to all those (gods) who
abide at the fence.</q> He does the same under the door of
the house and says: <q>That belongs to all those (gods) who
dwell with me.</q> Then he goes to the loom, and brings it
its offering, and says: <q>That belongs to all the <q>Artificers</q>
who have helped me in weaving.</q> After that he lays all
his charms on a mat spread in the house, and brings them
also their offering, and speaks with them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Another account describes the priestly functions of the
house-father still more fully. Every house-father takes a
raw piece of yam and goes with it to his loom (<foreign rend='italic'>agbati</foreign>) and
prays: <q>May the Artificers take this yam and eat! When
they practise their art, may it prosper!</q> Again he takes
a raw yam and goes with it under the house-door and
prays: <q>O my guardian-spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>aklama</foreign>) and all ye gods
who pay heed to this house, come and eat yams! When I
also eat of them, may I remain healthy and nowhere feel
pain! May my housemates all remain healthy!</q> After
he has invoked their protection on his family, he takes a
cooked yam, crumbles it on a stone, and mixes it with red
oil. With this mixture he goes again to the loom and prays
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
as before. But even that is not the end of the worship of
the Artificers. He again crumbles a cooked yam, but this
time he does not mix it with red oil; he goes to the entrance
of the homestead and prays again to the loom: <q>He among
the Artificers who does not relish yams mixed with oil, let
him come and take the white yam and eat it!</q> From
there he goes again under the house-door and prays: <q>He
of my guardian gods and he of the watchers of the house
who likes not yams mixed with oil, let him come and take
the white yam from my hand and eat!</q> From the house-door
he steps into the midst of the chamber and says:
<q>He who relishes not the yams mixed with oil, may eat the
white; he who relishes not the white may eat the red; and
he who relishes not the red may eat the uncooked!</q> With
this prayer he has completed his duties as house-priest.
Just as the weaver prays to his loom, so the hunter prays
to his musket, the smith to his hammer and anvil, and the
carpenter to his plane and saw.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now, while the free people begin to cook the yams so
soon as the priest has left the town, the slaves of the Earth
Gods, the <foreign rend='italic'>Trõkluwo</foreign>, must first as children perform their duties
to the priest of their gods. Each of these children receives
from his parents on the morning of the Yam Festival two
pieces of yam, which he brings to the priest of his god. The
priest cuts off a small piece of the yam and divides the piece
again into four pieces. The child kneels before him and
lolls out his tongue. Holding two of these pieces of yam
in his hands, the priest utters a prayer over the child and
touches his tongue five times with the pieces of yam. Then
the child stretches his hands out, each of which the priest
touches five times with the same pieces of yam and prays
as before. Then he touches both feet of the child five times
and prays for the third time. He takes half of the cowry-shells
which the child has brought, fastens them on a string,
and hangs it round the child's neck. Thereby the child gets
leave to eat new yams.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>After all these preparations the yams are pounded into
a mash, and every one calls his brother, that he may eat
with him. When the meal is over, the people are called
together to amuse themselves and to drink palm wine. In
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
the afternoon every one bathes, puts on a new garment, and
girds himself with a new loin-cloth.</q><note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 304-310, 340;
compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp. 435, 480, 768. The
<q>slaves of the Earth-gods</q> are children
whom women have obtained through
prayers offered to Agbasia, the greatest
of the Earth-gods. When such a child
is born, it is regarded as the slave of
Agbasia; and the mother dedicates it
to the service of the god, as in similar
circumstances Hannah dedicated
Samuel to the Lord (1 Samuel i.). If
the child is a girl, she is married to
the priest's son; if it is a boy, he
serves the priest until his mother has
given birth to a girl whom she exchanges
for the boy. See J. Spieth,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 448-450. In all such
cases the original idea probably was
that the child has been begotten in the
woman by the god and therefore belongs
to him as to his father, in the
literal sense of the word.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival
of the
new yams
among the
Ashantees
in September.</note>
The Ashantees celebrate the festival of the new yams
early in September; until it is over none of the people may
taste of the new yams. <q>The Yam Custom,</q> we are told,
<q>is like the Saturnalia; neither theft, intrigue, nor assault
are punishable during the continuance, but the grossest
liberty prevails, and each sex abandons itself to its passions.</q>
An eye-witness has described the scene at Coomassie, the
capital: <q>The next morning the King ordered a large
quantity of rum to be poured into brass pans, in various
parts of the town; the crowd pressing around, and drinking
like hogs; freemen and slaves, women and children, striking,
kicking, and trampling each other under foot, pushed head
foremost into the pans, and spilling much more than they
drank. In less than an hour, excepting the principal men,
not a sober person was to be seen, parties of four, reeling
and rolling under the weight of another, whom they affected
to be carrying home; strings of women covered with red
paint, hand in hand, falling down like rows of cards; the
commonest mechanics and slaves furiously declaiming on
state palavers; the most discordant music, the most obscene
songs, children of both sexes prostrate in insensibility. All
wore their handsomest cloths, which they trailed after them
to a great length, in a drunken emulation of extravagance
and dirtiness.</q> About a hundred persons, mostly culprits
reserved for the purpose, used to be sacrificed at this festival
in Coomassie. All the chiefs killed several slaves that their
blood might flow into the hole from which the new yam was
taken. Such as could not afford to kill slaves took the head
of a slave who had already been sacrificed and placed it in
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
the hole. About ten days after these ceremonies the whole
of the royal household ate new yams for the first time in the
market-place, the King himself being in attendance. Next
day he and his captains set off before sunrise to perform their
annual ablutions in the river Dah; almost all the inhabitants
of the capital followed him, so that the streets appeared to
be deserted. The following day the King, attended by his
suite, washed in the marsh at the south-east end of the town
and laved the water not only over himself but also over the
chairs, stools, gold and silver plate, and the articles of furniture
which were set aside for his special use.<note place='foot'>T. E. Bowdich, <hi rend='italic'>Mission from
Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee</hi>, New
Edition (London, 1873), pp. 226-229.</note> From another
account it appears that the King of Ashantee must eat the
new yams before any of his subjects was at liberty to do so.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Tshi-speaking
Peoples of the Gold Coast</hi> (London,
1887), pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Similarly in the West African kingdom of Assinie, which
forms part of the French possessions of Senegal, the king
must eat the new yams eight full days before the people
may taste them.<note place='foot'>J. C. Reichenbach, <q>Etude sur
le royaume d'Assinie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la
Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), vii.ème
Série, xi. (1890) p. 349.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival of
the new
yams at
Coomassie
and Benin.</note>
A second festival of yams used to be celebrated at
Coomassie in December, when the king or a fetish priest
consecrated the new yams before they could be eaten by
common folk. On one of the days of this December
celebration all the laws were suspended, and every man
might do what seemed good in his own eyes: he might
even, contrary to custom, look at the king's wives, to
the number of several hundreds, when they returned with
the king and his suite from washing in the fetish water
of Tana. All that day drinking went on, and the noise
and uproar were prolonged far into the night. Early
in the morning a human victim was sacrificed: the first
man found near the gates of the palace was seized,
butchered, and cut in pieces, and the executioners danced
with the bleeding fragments of the victim in their hands or
fastened round their necks. Before he ate of the new yams
the king washed himself in fetish water brought from distant
springs, and the chiefs performed similar ablutions.<note place='foot'>Ramseyer and Kühne, <hi rend='italic'>Four
Years in Ashantee</hi> (London, 1875), pp.
147-151; E. Perregaux, <hi rend='italic'>Chez les
Achanti</hi> (Neuchatel, 1906), pp.
158-160.</note> In
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
Benin the new yams might not be eaten until the king had
performed certain ceremonies, among which one is said to
have been a pretence of making a yam to grow in a pot.
Dancing, merrymaking, and farces or plays formed part of
the festival; the city was crowded with people, and they
indulged in a regular orgie.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>Great Benin</hi>
(Halifax, England, 1903), pp. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Nandi at
eating the
new eleusine
grain.</note>
Among the Nandi of British East Africa, when the
eleusine grain is ripening in autumn, every woman who owns
a cornfield goes out into it with her daughters, and they all
pluck some of the ripe grain. Each of the women then
fixes one grain in her necklace and chews another, which she
rubs on her forehead, throat, and breast. No mark of joy
escapes them; sorrowfully they cut a basketful of the new
corn, and carrying it home place it in the loft to dry. As
the ceiling is of wickerwork, a good deal of the grain drops
through the crevices and falls into the fire, where it explodes
with a crackling noise. The people make no attempt to
prevent this waste; for they regard the crackling of the grain
in the fire as a sign that the souls of the dead are partaking
of it. A few days later porridge is made from the new grain
and served up with milk at the evening meal. All the
members of the family take some of the porridge and dab it
on the walls and roofs of the huts; also they put a little in
their mouths and spit it out towards the east and on the outside
of the huts. Then, holding up some of the grain in his
hand, the head of the family prays to God for health and
strength, and likewise for milk, and everybody present repeats
the words of the prayer after him.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Baganda,
when the beans were ripe, a woman would call her eldest
son to eat some of the first which she cooked; if she
neglected to do so, it was believed that she would incur
the displeasure of the gods and fall ill. After the meal her
husband jumped over her, and the beans might thereafter
be eaten by all.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 428.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival of
the new
fruits
among the
Caffres of
Natal and
Zululand.</note>
Amongst the Caffres of Natal and Zululand, no one
may eat of the new fruits till after a festival which marks
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
the beginning of the Caffre year and falls at the end of
December or the beginning of January. All the people
assemble at the king's kraal, where they feast and dance.
Before they separate the <q>dedication of the people</q> takes
place. Various fruits of the earth, as corn, mealies, and
pumpkins, mixed with the flesh of a sacrificed animal and
with <q>medicine,</q> are boiled in great pots, and a little of
this food is placed in each man's mouth by the king
himself. After thus partaking of the sanctified fruits, a
man is himself sanctified for the whole year, and may
immediately get in his crops.<note place='foot'>F. Speckmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Hermannsburger
Mission in Afrika</hi> (Hermannsburg,
1876), pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is believed that if any
man were to partake of the new fruits before the festival,
he would die;<note place='foot'>L. Grout, <hi rend='italic'>Zulu-land</hi> (Philadelphia,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 161.</note> if he were detected, he would be put to
death, or at least all his cattle would be taken from him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>(South African) Folk-lore Journal</hi>,
i. (1879) p. 135; Rev. H. Callaway,
<hi rend='italic'>Religious System of the Amazulu</hi>, Part
iii. p. 389 note.</note>
The holiness of the new fruits is well marked by the rule
that they must be cooked in a special pot which is used
only for this purpose, and on a new fire kindled by a
magician through the friction of two sticks which are called
<q>husband and wife.</q> These sticks are prepared by the
sorcerers from the wood of the <foreign rend='italic'>Uzwati</foreign> tree and belong
exclusively to the chief. The <q>wife</q> is the shorter of the
two. When the magician has kindled the new fire on
which the new fruits are to be cooked, he hands the fire-sticks
back to the chief, for no other hand may touch them;
and they are then put away till they are required next
season. The sticks are regarded as in a measure sacred,
and no one, except the chief's personal servant, may go to
the side of the hut where they are kept. No pot but the
one used for the preparation of this feast may be set on a
fire made by the friction of the <q>husband and wife.</q> When
the feast is over, the fire is carefully extinguished, and the
pot is put away with the fire-sticks, where it remains untouched
for another year.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in
Africa</hi>, Second Edition (London, 1890),
pp. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the conception of the
two fire-sticks as husband and wife,
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dance of
the Zulu
king at the
festival.
Licentious
character
of the
festival.
The festival
as celebrated
by
the Pondos.
Bull-fights
and games. License accorded
to
chiefs and
others at
this festival
among the
Zulus. Traces of
an annual
abdication
of Zulu
kings, perhaps
of a
custom of
burning
them and
scattering
their ashes.</note>
A remarkable feature of the festival, as it is observed at
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
the court of the Zulu king, is a dance performed by the
king himself in a mantle of grass or, according to another
account, of herbs and corn-leaves. This mantle is afterwards
burnt and its ashes are scattered and trodden into the
ground by cattle.<note place='foot'>J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal</hi>
(London, 1857), p. 27; N. Isaacs,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels and Adventures in Eastern
Africa</hi> (London, 1836), ii. 293;
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>
(London, 1904), pp. 270, 271.</note> Further, it is worthy of notice that
the festival is described as a saturnalia, and we are told
that <q>a great deal of noise and dancing goes on, and people
are not supposed to be responsible for what they say or
do.</q><note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 189.</note> Thus, for example, among the Pondos the festival
includes a period of license, during the continuance of
which the chief abdicates his functions and any crime may
be committed with impunity. The description of the
Pondo festival comprises so many interesting features that
I will reproduce it entire. <q>When a Pondo chief is to
hold the feast of first-fruits, some of his people procure a
ripe plant of the gourd family, pumpkin or calabash, from
another tribe. This is cooked; the inside cleaned out,
and the rind made ready for use as a vessel. It is then
presented to the chief with much ceremony. The first-fruits
are now brought forward, and a sacrifice, generally a
young bull, is offered, after which the feast commences.
The chief issues certain orders for the conduct of the proceedings,
tastes the fruits which are served in the gourd-dish
with which he has been presented, and then abdicates
all his functions while the festival lasts. The cattle from
all the neighbouring villages are collected in the vicinity,
and now they are brought together, and the bulls incited to
fight to determine which is to be king among them for the
next year. The young people engage in games and dances,
feats of strength and running. After these are over the
whole community give themselves over to disorder, debauchery,
and riot. In their bull-fights and games they
but did honour to the powers of nature, and now, as they
eat and drink, the same powers are honoured in another
form and by other rites. There is no one in authority to
keep order, and every man does what seems good in his
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
own eyes. Should a man stab his neighbour he escapes
all punishment, and so too with all other crimes against the
person, property, and morality. People are even permitted
to abuse the chief to his face, an offence which at any other
time would meet with summary vengeance and an unceremonious
dispatch to join the ancestors. While the feast
continues, a deafening noise is kept up by drumming, shouting,
hand-clapping, and every kind of instrument that can be
made to emit sound. Men advance to the chief and explain
their origin, and also the object they hold sacred, by
imitating the sounds and movements of their most sacred
animal. This is the person's totem. Others imitate the
gurgling made by an enemy when stabbed in the throat.
Those who adopt this latter emblem are known as <q>children
of the spear.</q> When the ceremonies, revels, and mummeries
are ended, the chief repairs to his accustomed place, and
sitting down there, by that act resumes his kingly functions.
He calls the bravest of his braves before him, who is
immediately clothed and decorated with skins of animals
suggestive of courage and strategy. He performs a dance
amid the frenzied shouting of the multitude, after which the
chief declares the festival at an end and harvest commenced.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 136-138,
from manuscript notes furnished
by J. Sutton. Mr. Macdonald has
described the custom more briefly in
his <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi>, Second Edition
(London, 1890), p. 189.</note>
Another writer, speaking of the Zulu festival
of first-fruits as it was celebrated in the time of the
ferocious despot Chaka, says that <q>at this period the
chiefs are allowed to converse unreservedly with the
king, speaking with great freedom, and in some measure
to be dictatorial.</q><note place='foot'>N. Isaacs, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Adventures
in Eastern Africa</hi> (London, 1836),
ii. 292.</note> Again, another traveller, who visited
the Zulus in the reign of King Panda, tells us that <q>in
spite of the practice of the most absolute despotism there
are three days in the year when the nation in its turn has
the right to call the king to a severe account for his acts.
It is at the general assembly of the warriors, when the
maize is ripe, that the lively discussions take place and the
questions are put to which the king must answer at once
in a manner satisfactory to the people. I have then seen
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
simple warriors come leaping from the ranks, assume the
style of fluent and excessively energetic orators, and not
only confront the fiery glare of Panda, but even attack him
before everybody, blame his acts, call them infamous and
base, compel him to vindicate his conduct, and then refute
his vindication by dissecting it and exposing its falsehood,
finally proceeding to haughty threats and winding up the
harangue with a gesture of contempt.</q><note place='foot'>A. Delegorgue, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans
l'Afrique Australe</hi> (Paris, 1847), ii.
237.</note> Such liberties
taken with the despotic Zulu kings seem to point to a time
when they too, like the Pondo chiefs, abdicated or were
deposed during the festival. Perhaps we may even go a
step further. We have seen that on this occasion the Zulu
king dances in a mantle of grass or of herbs and corn-leaves,
which is afterwards burnt and the ashes scattered
and trodden into the ground. This custom seems clearly
intended to promote the fertility of the earth, and in earlier
times the same end may have been compassed by burning
the king himself and dispersing his ashes; for we have seen
that a Bechuana tribe, of the same Bantu stock as the
Zulus, were wont to sacrifice a human victim for the good
of the crops and to scatter his ashes over the ground.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. p. 240.</note> In
this connexion it should be borne in mind that we have
found independent evidence of a custom of putting the
Zulu king to death whenever his bodily strength began to
fail.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
On the Zulu festival of first-fruits see
also T. Arbousset et F. Daumas,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage d'Exploration au Nord-Est de
la Colonie du Cap de Bonne Espérance</hi>
(Paris, 1843), pp. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G.
Fritsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eingeborenen Süd-Afrikas</hi>
(Breslau, 1872), p. 143. Fritsch
mentions that after executing a grotesque
dance in the presence of the
assembled multitude the king gives
formal permission to eat of the new
fruits by dashing a gourd or calabash
to the ground. This ceremony of
breaking the calabash is mentioned
also by J. Shooter (<hi rend='italic'>Kafirs of Natal</hi>, p.
27), L. Grout (<hi rend='italic'>Zulu-land</hi>, p. 162), and
Mr. Dudley Kidd (<hi rend='italic'>The Essential
Kafir</hi>, p. 271). According to this
last writer the calabash is filled with
boiled specimens of the new fruits, and
the king sprinkles the people with the
cooked food, frequently spitting it out
on them. Mr. Grout tells us (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>)
that at the ceremony a bull is killed
and its gall drunk by the king and the
people. In killing it the warriors
must use nothing but their naked
hands. The flesh of the bull is given
to the boys to eat what they like and
burn the rest; the men may not taste
it. See L. Grout, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 161. According
to Shooter, two bulls are
killed; the first is black, the second
of another colour. The boys who eat
the beef of the black bull may not
drink till the next morning, else the
king would be defeated in war or
visited with some personal misfortune.
See Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According
to another account the sacrifice
of the bull, performed by the warriors
of a particular regiment with their
bare hands, takes place several weeks
before the festival of first-fruits, and
<q>the strength of the bull is supposed
to enter into the king, thereby prolonging
his health and strength.</q> See
D. Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus and
Amatongas</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Edinburgh, 1875), p. 91.
For a general account of the Caffre
festival of first-fruits, see Dudley Kidd,
<hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi> (London, 1904),
pp. 270-272.</note>
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Bechuanas
before eating
the new
fruits.</note>
Among the Bechuanas it is a rule that before they
partake of the new crops they must purify themselves.
The purification takes place at the commencement of the
new year on a day in January which is fixed by the chief.
It begins in the great kraal of the tribe, where all the adult
males assemble. Each of them takes in his hand leaves of
a gourd called by the natives <foreign rend='italic'>lerotse</foreign> (described as something
between a pumpkin and a vegetable marrow); and having
crushed the leaves he anoints with the expressed juice his
big toes and his navel; many people indeed apply the
juice to all the joints of their body, but the better-informed
say that this is a vulgar departure from ancient custom.
After this ceremony in the great kraal every man goes
home to his own kraal, assembles all the members of his
family, men, women, and children, and smears them all
with the juice of the <foreign rend='italic'>lerotse</foreign> leaves. Some of the leaves are
also pounded, mixed with milk in a large wooden dish, and
given to the dogs to lap up. Then the porridge plate of
each member of the family is rubbed with the <foreign rend='italic'>lerotse</foreign> leaves.
When this purification has been completed, but not before,
the people are free to eat of the new crops. On the night
after the purification every man was bound, as a matter of
ritual, to sleep with his chief wife. If she had been unfaithful
to him during the past year, it was incumbent on her to
confess her sin before she fulfilled her part of the ceremony.
Having confessed she was purified by a medicine-man, who
fumigated her with the smoke produced by burning a bean
plant. Thereupon husband and wife cut each other slightly
under the navel, and each of them rubbed his or her blood,
mixed with <q>medicine,</q> into the other's wound. That
completed the purification of the woman, and the pair might
now proceed with the rest of the rite. Should a married
man be from home at the time when the annual purification
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
ceremony is performed, he is thought to be in a very sad
plight; indeed his chances of surviving for another year are
supposed to be small. On his return home, he dare not
enter his own house, for he would pollute it, and if even
his shadow were to fall on one of his children, the child
would die. He must wait till his wife comes to him and
brings him a calabash of water to drink, which is a sign
that she has waited for his return to perform the rite of
purification together. But if she does not bring the
water, he knows that in his absence she has performed the
rite with some other man, and it becomes necessary to
purge her by means of fumigation and blood-letting, as
described before. But even when that purgation is completed,
husband and wife may not indulge in connubial
intercourse for the rest of the year, that is, until the
next annual purification has taken place. The Bechuanas
think that <q>any breach of this rule will be punished with
supernatural penalties&mdash;the husband, wife, or child will die.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <q>Notes
on the Totemism of the Becwana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) pp. 311-313. It is very
remarkable that among several Bantu
tribes the cohabitation of husband and
wife is enjoined as a religious or magical
rite on a variety of solemn occasions,
such as after the death of a son or
daughter, the circumcision of a child,
the first menstruation of a daughter,
the occupation of a new house or of a
new village, etc. For examples see
C. W. Hobley, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of A-Kamba
and other East African Tribes</hi> (Cambridge,
1910), pp. 58, 59, 60, 65, 67,
69, 74; H. A. Junod, <q>Les Conceptions
physiologiques des Bantou
Sud-Africains et leurs tabous,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue
d'Ethnographie et de Sociologie</hi>, i.
(1910) p. 148; Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The
Baganda</hi> (London, 1911), pp. 48, 144,
357, 363, 378, 428, etc.; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Further
Notes on the Manners and
Customs of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) pp. 59, 61. Among the
Baganda the act of stepping or leaping
over a woman is regarded as equivalent
to cohabitation with her, and is
accepted as a ritual substitute for it
(J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>, p. 357 note).
The ideas on which this custom of
ceremonial cohabitation is based are
by no means clear.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Matabele
at eating
the new
fruits.</note>
Among the Matabele, another Bantu tribe of South
Africa, no one might partake of the new fruits till the king
had first tasted of them; any one who was known to have
broken the law was instantly put to death. On this
occasion the regiments assembled at Bulawayo, the capital,
and danced in a great semicircle before the king, who
occasionally joined in the dance. When he did so, the
medicine-men and their satellites, armed with thorn-bushes,
rushed about among the dancers and incited them to fresh
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
efforts by a vigorous application of the thorns to the bodies
of such as seemed to flag. The king's wives also sang and
danced before him in long lines, holding the marriage ring in
their right hands and green boughs in their left. On the
third day of the festival hundreds of oxen were sacrificed:
the flesh and blood of the black or sacred cattle were
converted into charms; while the carcases of the rest were
cut up and distributed among the people, who feasted upon
them. The fourth day was specially set apart for the
ceremony of the first-fruits. In the morning all the people
went down to the river to wash, and on their return a witch-doctor
or medicine-man took a dish of the new vegetables
and corn, mixed with charms, and scattered the contents
by handfuls among the crowd, who seized and ate them.
After that the people were free to eat the new crops.
According to one account, this festival of first-fruits was
held at the first full moon which followed the summer
solstice (the twenty-first of December in the southern
hemisphere); according to another account, it took place a
few days after the full moon of February, which marked the
beginning of the Matabele year.<note place='foot'>Ch. Croonenberghs, S.J., <q>La
fête de la Grande Danse dans le haut
Zambeze,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xiv. (1882) pp. 230-234; L. Decle,
<hi rend='italic'>Three Years in Savage Africa</hi> (London,
1898), pp. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The two
accounts supplement each other. I
have combined features from both in
the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
observed
by the
Ovambo
at eating
the new
fruits.</note>
The Ovambo or, as they call themselves, the Ovakuanjama,
of South-West Africa, may not partake of the new
fruits of the <foreign rend='italic'>omuongo</foreign> tree, which ripen in February and from
which an intoxicating beverage is extracted, until certain
ceremonies have been performed. Among other things
husband and wife mutually offer each other one of the
fruits, make white strokes with chalk each on the brow,
cheeks, and nose of the other, and accompany the action
with the formal expression of good wishes. If this ceremony,
which seems to mark the beginning of the New Year, were
omitted, they believe that they would be attacked by a
painful disease of the knee-joints which would cripple them.<note place='foot'>H. Tönjes, <hi rend='italic'>Ovamboland, Land,
Leute, Mission</hi> (Berlin, 1911), pp. 200
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
observed
by the
Bororo
Indians
before eating
the new
maize.</note>
The Bororo Indians of Brazil think that it would be
certain death to eat the new maize before it has been blessed
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
by the medicine-man. The ceremony of blessing it is as
follows. The half-ripe husk is washed and placed before
the medicine-man, who by dancing and singing for several
hours, and by incessant smoking, works himself up into a
state of ecstasy, whereupon he bites into the husk, trembling
in every limb and uttering shrieks from time to
time. A similar ceremony is performed whenever a large
animal or a large fish is killed. The Bororo are firmly persuaded
that were any man to touch unconsecrated maize or
meat, before the ceremony had been completed, he and his
whole tribe would perish.<note place='foot'>V. Frič and P. Radin, <q>Contributions
to the Study of the Bororo Indians,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxvi. (1906) p. 392.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>busk</foreign> or
festival of
first-fruits
among the
Creek
Indians
of North
America. Fast and
purgation. New fire
made by
friction.</note>
Amongst the Creek Indians of North America, the <foreign rend='italic'>busk</foreign>
or festival of first-fruits was the chief ceremony of the year.<note place='foot'>The ceremony is described independently
by James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of
the American Indians</hi> (London, 1775),
pp. 96-111; W. Bartram, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
through North and South Carolina,
Georgia, East and West Florida</hi> (London,
1792), pp. 507 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Hodgson,
<hi rend='italic'>Letters from North America</hi> (London,
1824), i. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B. Hawkins,
<q>Sketch of the Creek Country,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Collections of the Georgia Historical
Society</hi>, iii. (Savannah, 1848) pp. 75-78;
A. A. M'Gillivray, in H. R.
Schoolcraft's <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes of the
United States</hi> (Philadelphia, 1853-1856),
v. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. G. Speck,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of the Yuchi Indians</hi>
(Philadelphia, 1909), pp. 112-131.
The fullest descriptions are those
of Adair and Speck. In the text I
have chiefly followed Adair, our oldest
authority. A similar ceremony was
observed by the Cherokees. See the
description (from an unpublished MS.
of J. H. Payne, author of <hi rend='italic'>Home, Sweet
Home</hi>) in <q>Observations on the Creek
and Cherokee Indians, by William
Bartram, 1789, with prefatory and
supplementary notes by E. G. Squier,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the American Ethnological
Society</hi>, vol. iii. Part i. (1853)
p. 75. The Indians of Alabama also
held a great festival at their harvest
in July. They passed the day fasting,
lit a new fire, purged themselves,
and offered the first-fruits to
their <foreign rend='italic'>Manitoo</foreign>: the ceremony ended
with a religious dance. See Bossu,
<hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Voyages aux Indes occidentales</hi>
(Paris, 1768), ii. 54. These
Indians of Alabama were probably
either the Creeks or the Cherokees.</note>
It was held in July or August, when the corn was ripe, and
marked the end of the old year and the beginning of the
new one. Before it took place, none of the Indians would
eat or even handle any part of the new harvest. Sometimes
each town had its own busk; sometimes several towns
united to hold one in common. Before celebrating the
busk, the people provided themselves with new clothes and
new household utensils and furniture; they collected their
old clothes and rubbish, together with all the remaining
grain and other old provisions, cast them together in one
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
common heap, and consumed them with fire.<note place='foot'>W. Bartram, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, p. 507.</note> As a preparation
for the ceremony, all the fires in the village were extinguished,
and the ashes swept clean away. In particular,
the hearth or altar of the temple was dug up and the ashes
carried out. Then the chief priest put some roots of the
button-snake plant, with some green tobacco leaves and a
little of the new fruits, at the bottom of the fireplace, which
he afterwards commanded to be covered up with white clay,
and wetted over with clean water. A thick arbour of green
branches of young trees was then made over the altar.<note place='foot'>So amongst the Cherokees, according
to J. H. Payne, an arbour of green
boughs was made in the sacred square;
then <q>a beautiful bushy-topped shade-tree
was cut down close to the roots,
and planted in the very centre of the
sacred square. Every man then provided
himself with a green bough.</q></note>
Meanwhile the women at home were cleaning out their
houses, renewing the old hearths, and scouring all the cooking
vessels that they might be ready to receive the new fire
and the new fruits.<note place='foot'>So Adair. Bartram, on the other
hand, as we have seen, says that the
people provided themselves with new
household utensils.</note> The public or sacred square was carefully
swept of even the smallest crumbs of previous feasts,
<q>for fear of polluting the first-fruit offerings.</q> Also every
vessel that had contained or had been used about any food
during the expiring year was removed from the temple
before sunset. Then all the men who were not known to
have violated the law of the first-fruit offering and that of
marriage during the year were summoned by a crier to
enter the holy square and observe a solemn fast. But the
women (except six old ones), the children, and all who had
not attained the rank of warriors were forbidden to enter
the square. Sentinels were also posted at the corners of the
square to keep out all persons deemed impure and all
animals. A strict fast was then observed for two nights
and a day, the devotees drinking a bitter decoction of
button-snake root <q>in order to vomit and purge their sinful
bodies.</q> That the people outside the square might also be
purified, one of the old men laid down a quantity of green
tobacco at a corner of the square; this was carried off by
an old woman and distributed to the people without, who
chewed and swallowed it <q>in order to afflict their souls.</q>
During this general fast, the women, children, and men of
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
weak constitution were allowed to eat after mid-day, but not
before. On the morning when the fast ended, the women
brought a quantity of the old year's food to the outside of
the sacred square. These provisions were then fetched in
and set before the famished multitude, but all traces of them
had to be removed before noon. When the sun was declining
from the meridian, all the people were commanded by
the voice of a crier to stay within doors, to do no bad act,
and to be sure to extinguish and throw away every spark
of the old fire. Universal silence now reigned. Then the
high priest made the new fire by the friction of two pieces
of wood, and placed it on the altar under the green arbour.
This new fire was believed to atone for all past crimes
except murder. Next a basket of new fruits was brought;
the high priest took out a little of each sort of fruit, rubbed
it with bear's oil, and offered it, together with some flesh,
<q>to the bountiful holy spirit of fire, as a first-fruit offering,
and an annual oblation for sin.</q> He also consecrated the
sacred emetics (the button-snake root and the cassina or
black-drink) by pouring a little of them into the fire. The
persons who had remained outside now approached, without
entering, the sacred square; and the chief priest thereupon
made a speech, exhorting the people to observe their old
rites and customs, announcing that the new divine fire had
purged away the sins of the past year, and earnestly warning
the women that, if any of them had not extinguished
the old fire, or had contracted any impurity, they must
forthwith depart, <q>lest the divine fire should spoil both them
and the people.</q> Some of the new fire was then set down
outside the holy square; the women carried it home joyfully,
and laid it on their unpolluted hearths. When several
towns had united to celebrate the festival, the new fire
might thus be carried for several miles. The new fruits
were then dressed on the new fires and eaten with bear's oil,
which was deemed indispensable. At one point of the
festival the men rubbed the new corn between their hands,
then on their faces and breasts.<note place='foot'>B. Hawkins, <q>Sketch,</q> etc., p. 76.</note> During the festival which
followed, the warriors, dressed in their wild martial array,
their heads covered with white down and carrying white
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
feathers in their hands, danced round the sacred arbour,
under which burned the new fire. The ceremonies lasted
eight days, during which the strictest continence was practised.
Towards the conclusion of the festival the warriors
fought a mock battle; then the men and women together,
in three circles, danced round the sacred fire. Lastly, all
the people smeared themselves with white clay and bathed
in running water. They came out of the water believing
that no evil could now befall them for what they had done
amiss in the past. So they departed in joy and peace.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival of
the new
fruits
among the
Yuchi
Indians. Game of
ball.</note>
Ceremonies of the same general type are still annually
observed by the Yuchi Indians of Oklahoma, who belong to
the Creek nation but speak a different language. The rites
are said to have been instituted by the Sun. They are
solemnised in the public square, and are timed so as to
coincide with the ripening of the corn, which usually takes
place about the middle or early part of July. Continence and
abstinence from salt are prescribed during their celebration,
and all the men must fast for twelve hours before they
take the emetic. A sacred new fire is kindled by striking
two stones against each other, after which all the males are
scarified or scratched by an official on the arm or breast, so
as to let blood flow and drip on the ground of the public
square. This bleeding of the men is said to be symbolical
of the origin of the Yuchi people; for the first Yuchi sprang
from some drops of blood which the mother of the Sun let
fall on earth at one of her monthly periods. Hence the Yuchi
call themselves the Children of the Sun. The solemn rite
of scratching is followed by the no less solemn rite of vomiting.
This also was instituted by the Sun. He taught the
Indians to steep the button-snake root and the red root in
water and to drink the decoction, in order that they might
vomit and so purify their bodies against sickness during the
ensuing year. They think that if they did not thus purge
themselves before eating the new corn, they would fall sick.
The chief of the town is charged with the solemn duty of
preparing the nauseous concoction, and he is assisted by four
boys who have been initiated into the mysteries. The pots
containing the stuff are decorated on the rim with a pattern
representing the sun, and they stand east of the fire near
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
the middle of the public square. The order of drinking is
regulated by the rank of the drinkers. When the sun is
about the zenith, the four noblest come forward, face eastward,
and gulp down the vile but salutary potion; then they
retire to their places and await the usual results. When
they feel the inward workings of the draught, they step out
of the square and discharge the contents of their stomachs
in a place set apart for the purpose. They are followed
by another party of four, and that by another, and so on,
till all the men have thus purged themselves. The rite is
repeated several times. When it is over, they all go to
water and wash off the paint with which they were adorned;
then returning to their places in the square they feast on the
new corn. After a rest of some hours the men engage in
ball play, not as a mere recreation but as a matter of ritual.
Sides are chosen; every player is equipped with two rackets,
and the aim of each side is to drive the ball through their
opponents' goal, which consists of two uprights and a cross-piece.
The two goals stand east and west of each other.
During the following night dancing is kept up, and a
general laxity, degenerating into debauchery, prevails; but
parents and elders wink at the excesses of the young folk.
Among the dances are some in which the dancers mimick
the motions and cries of their totemic animals, such as ducks,
buzzards, rabbits, fish, buffaloes, chickens, and owls.<note place='foot'>F. G. Speck, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of the
Yuchi Indians</hi> (Philadelphia, 1909),
pp. 86-89, 105-107, 112-131.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Green Corn
Dance
among the
Seminole
Indians. Festival
of the
new corn
among the
Natchez
Indians.</note>
To this day, also, the remnant of the Seminole Indians
of Florida, a people of the same stock as the Creeks,<note place='foot'>Th. Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie der
Naturvölker</hi>, iii. (Leipsic, 1862) p.
42; A. S. Gatschet, <hi rend='italic'>A Migration
Legend of the Creek Indians</hi>, i. (Philadelphia,
1884) pp. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, iii. 167.</note> hold
an annual purification and festival called the Green Corn
Dance, at which the new corn is eaten. On the evening of
the first day of the festival they quaff a nauseous <q>Black
Drink,</q> as it is called, which acts both as an emetic and a
purgative; they believe that he who does not drink of this
liquor cannot safely eat the new green corn, and besides that
he will be sick at some time in the year. While the liquor is
being drunk, the dancing begins, and the medicine-men join
in it. Next day they eat of the green corn; the following
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
day they fast, probably from fear of polluting the sacred food
in their stomachs by contact with common food; but the
third day they hold a great feast.<note place='foot'>C. MacCauley, <q>Seminole Indians
of Florida,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fifth Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1887), pp. 522 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Further, the Natchez
Indians, another tribe of the same stock, who used to inhabit
a district on the lower course and eastern bank of the Mississippi,
ate the new corn sacramentally at a great festival
which has been fully described by Du Pratz, the French
historian of Louisiana. As his work is probably not easily
accessible to many of my readers, I shall perhaps consult
their convenience by extracting his description entire. The
Natchez, he tells us, began their year in March and divided
it into thirteen moons. Their sixth moon, which answered
to our August, was the Mulberry Moon, and the seventh was
the moon of Maize or Great Corn. <q rend='pre'>This feast is beyond
dispute the most solemn of all. It principally consists in
eating in common, and in a religious manner, of new corn,
which had been sown expressly with that design, with suitable
ceremonies. This corn is sown upon a spot of ground
never before cultivated; which ground is dressed and prepared
by the warriors alone, who also are the only persons
that sow the corn, weed it, reap it, and gather it. When
this corn is near ripe, the warriors fix on a place proper for
the general feast, and close adjoining to that they form a
round granary, the bottom and sides of which are of cane;
this they fill with the corn, and when they have finished the
harvest, and covered the granary, they acquaint the Great
Sun,<note place='foot'>That is, the grand chief of the
nation. All the chiefs of the Natchez
were called Suns and were connected
with the head chief or Great Sun, who
bore on his breast an image of the
sun and claimed to be descended from
the luminary. See Bossu, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux
Voyages aux Indes occidentales</hi> (Paris,
1768), i. 42.</note> who appoints the day for the general feast. Some
days before the feast, they build huts for the Great Sun, and
for all the other families, round the granary, that of the
Great Sun being raised upon a mound of earth about two
feet high. On the feast-day the whole nation set out from
their village at sun-rising, leaving behind only the aged and
infirm that are not able to travel, and a few warriors, who
are to carry the Great Sun on a litter upon their shoulders.
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
The seat of this litter is covered with several deer-skins, and
to its four sides are fastened four bars which cross each other,
and are supported by eight men, who at every hundred paces
transfer their burden to eight other men, and thus successively
transport it to the place where the feast is celebrated, which
may be near two miles from the village. About nine o'clock
the Great Sun comes out of his hut dressed in the ornaments
of his dignity, and being placed in his litter, which has a
canopy at the head formed of flowers, he is carried in a few
minutes to the sacred granary, shouts of joy re-echoing on
all sides. Before he alights he makes the tour of the whole
place deliberately, and when he comes before the corn, he
salutes it thrice with the words <foreign rend='italic'>hoo, hoo, hoo</foreign>, lengthened and
pronounced respectfully. The salutation is repeated by the
whole nation, who pronounce the word <foreign rend='italic'>hoo</foreign> nine times distinctly,
and at the ninth time he alights and places himself
on his throne.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>New fire
made by
friction.</note>
<q rend='pre'>Immediately after they light a fire by rubbing two
pieces of wood violently against each other, and when everything
is prepared for dressing the corn, the chief of war,
accompanied by the warriors belonging to each family, presents
himself before the throne, and addresses the Sun in
these words, <q>Speak, for I hear thee.</q> The sovereign then
rises up, bows towards the four quarters of the world, and
advancing to the granary, lifts his eyes and hands to heaven,
and says, 'Give us corn': upon which the great chief of
war, the princes and princesses, and all the men, thank him
separately by pronouncing the word <foreign rend='italic'>hoo</foreign>. The corn is then
distributed, first to the female Suns, and then to all the
women, who run with it to their huts, and dress it with the
utmost dispatch. When the corn is dressed in all the huts,
a plate of it is put into the hands of the Great Sun, who
presents it to the four quarters of the world, and then says
to the chief of war, <q>Eat</q>; upon this signal the warriors
begin to eat in all the huts; after them the boys of whatever
age, excepting those who are on the breast; and last of all
the women. When the warriors have finished their repast,
they form themselves into two choirs before the huts, and
sing war songs for half an hour; after which the chief of
war, and all the warriors in succession, recount their brave
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
exploits, and mention, in a boasting manner, the number of
enemies they have slain. The youths are next allowed
to harangue, and each tells in the best manner he can,
not what he has done, but what he intends to do; and
if his discourse merits approbation, he is answered by a
general <foreign rend='italic'>hoo</foreign>; if not, the warriors hang down their heads
and are silent.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Torchlight
dance.</note>
<q rend='pre'>This great solemnity is concluded with a general dance
by torch-light. Upwards of two hundred torches of dried
canes, each of the thickness of a child, are lighted round the
place, where the men and women often continue dancing till
daylight; and the following is the disposition of their dance.
A man places himself on the ground with a pot covered with
a deer-skin, in the manner of a drum, to beat time to the
dancers; round him the women form themselves into a circle,
not joining hands, but at some distance from each other;
and they are inclosed by the men in another circle, who
have in each hand a chichicois, or calabash, with a stick
thrust through it to serve for a handle. When the dance
begins, the women move round the men in the centre, from
left to right, and the men contrariwise from right to left, and
they sometimes narrow and sometimes widen their circles.
In this manner the dance continues without intermission the
whole night, new performers successively taking the place of
those who are wearied and fatigued.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Game of
ball.</note>
<q rend='pre'>Next morning no person is seen abroad before the
Great Sun comes out of his hut, which is generally about
nine o'clock, and then upon a signal made by the drum, the
warriors make their appearance distinguished into two troops,
by the feathers which they wear on their heads. One of
these troops is headed by the Great Sun, and the other by
the chief of war, who begin a new diversion by tossing a
ball of deer-skin stuffed with Spanish beard from the one to
the other. The warriors quickly take part in the sport, and
a violent contest ensues which of the two parties shall drive
the ball to the hut of the opposite chief. The diversion
generally lasts two hours, and the victors are allowed to
wear the feathers of superiority till the following year, or till
the next time they play at the ball. After this the warriors
perform the war dance; and last of all they go and bathe;
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
an exercise which they are very fond of when they are
heated or fatigued.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The rest of that day is employed as the preceding; for
the feast holds as long as any of the corn remains. When
it is all eat up, the Great Sun is carried back in his litter,
and they all return to the village, after which he sends the
warriors to hunt both for themselves and him.</q><note place='foot'>Le Page Du Pratz, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Louisiana, or of the western parts of
Virginia and Carolina</hi>, translated from
the French, New Edition (London,
1774), pp. 338-341. See also J. R.
Swanton, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes of the Lower
Mississippi Valley</hi> (Washington, 1911),
pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, where the passage of Du
Pratz is translated in full from the
original French. From Mr. Swanton's
translation it appears that the English
version of Du Pratz, which I have
quoted in the text, is a good deal
abridged. On the festival of first-fruits
among the Natchez see also <hi rend='italic'>Lettres
édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, Nouvelle Édition,
vii. (Paris, 1781) p. 19; Charlevoix,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle France</hi>
(Paris, 1744), vi. 183; De Tonti,
<q>Relation de la Louisiane et du
Mississippi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Voyages au
Nord</hi>, v. (Amsterdam, 1734) p. 122;
Le Petit, <q>Relation des Natchez,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> ix. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (reprint of the account
in the <hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes</hi> cited above);
Bossu, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Voyages aux Indes
occidentales</hi> (Paris, 1768), i. 43. According
to Charlevoix, Le Petit, and
Bossu the festival fell in July. For
Chateaubriand's description of the
custom, see below, pp. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Salish and
Tinneh
Indians
before they
eat the first
wild berries
or roots of
the season.</note>
Even tribes which do not till the ground sometimes
observe analogous ceremonies when they gather the first
wild fruits or dig the first roots of the season. Thus among
the Salish and Tinneh Indians of North-West America,
<q>before the young people eat the first berries or roots of the
season, they always addressed the fruit or plant, and begged
for its favour and aid. In some tribes regular First-fruit
ceremonies were annually held at the time of picking the
wild fruit or gathering the roots, and also among the salmon-eating
tribes when the run of the <q>sockeye</q> salmon began.
These ceremonies were not so much thanksgivings, as performances
to ensure a plentiful crop or supply of the
particular object desired, for if they were not properly and
reverently carried out there was danger of giving offence to
the <q>spirits</q> of the objects, and being deprived of them.</q>
For example, these Indians are fond of the young shoots or
suckers of the wild raspberry, and they observe the following
ceremony at gathering the first of them in season.
<q>When the shoots are ready to pick, that is, when they are
about six or eight inches above the ground, the chief, or
directing elder of the community, instructs his wife or his
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
daughters to pluck a small bundle of these and prepare
them for eating. This they do, using a new pot or kettle
for cooking them in. In the meantime all the settlement
comes together to take part in the ceremony. They stand
in a great circle, the presiding chief, elder, or medicine-man
as the case may be, and his assistants being in their midst.
Whoever is conducting the ceremony now silently invokes
the spirit of the plants, the tenor of his prayer being that it
will be propitious to them and grant them a good supply of
the suckers. While the invocation is being made all in the
circle must keep their eyes reverently closed, this being an
essential part in all such ceremonies, the non-observance of
which would anger the spirits and cause them to withhold
the favours sought. To ensure this being strictly done,
the assisting elders are armed with long wands with which
they strike any person found opening his eyes during the
prayer. After this part of the ceremony is over the cooked
suckers are handed to the presiding officer in a newly
carved dish, and a small portion is given to each person
present, who reverently and decorously eats it. This
brings the ceremony to a close. Later, when the berries
of this plant are ripe, a second and similar ceremony takes
place.</q><note place='foot'>C. Hill-Tout, <hi rend='italic'>The Far West, the Home of the Salish and Déné</hi> (London,
1907), pp. 168-170.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Thompson
Indians
before they
eat the first
wild berries
or roots of
the season.</note>
The Thompson Indians of British Columbia cook and
eat the sunflower root (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Balsamorrhiza sagittata</foreign>, Nutt.), but
they used to regard it as a mysterious being, and observed a
number of taboos in connexion with it; for example, women
who were engaged in digging or cooking the root must
practise continence, and no man might come near the oven
where the women were baking the root. When young
people ate the first berries, roots, or other products of the
season, they addressed a prayer to the Sunflower-Root as
follows: <q>I inform thee that I intend to eat thee. Mayest
thou always help me to ascend, so that I may always be
able to reach the tops of mountains, and may I never be
clumsy! I ask this from thee, Sunflower-Root. Thou art
the greatest of all in mystery.</q> To omit this prayer would
make the eater lazy and cause him to sleep long in the
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
morning. Again, when the first tobacco of the season was
gathered and smoked for the first time, the inhabitants of each
lodge among the Thompson Indians observed the following
ceremony. An elderly man assembled all the inmates, often
outside the lodge and generally after sunset, and caused all
the adult men and women, who were in the habit of smoking,
to sit down in a circle, while he stood in the middle.
Sometimes he made a long speech to the people, but as a
rule he simply said, <q>Be it known to you that we will cut up
the chief,</q> meaning by the chief the tobacco. So saying he
cut up some of the tobacco, and after mixing it with bear-berry
leaves he filled a large pipe, lighted it, and handed it
to each person, following the sun's course. Everybody took
one whiff, and holding up his or her hands, the palms close
together, blew the smoke downwards between the fingers and
over the breast; and as the smoke descended, he crossed his
hands on his breast, and rubbing his chest and shoulders
with both hands, as if he were rubbing the smoke in, he
prayed: <q>Lengthen my breath, chief, so that I may never be
sick, and so that I may not die for a long time to come.</q>
By the chief he meant the tobacco. When every one had
had his whiff, the tobacco was cut up small and a piece
given to each person.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians of
British Columbia</hi>, p. 349 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, April, 1900).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ceremonies
observed
by
savages at
eating the
first fruits
of any crop
seem to be
based on
the idea
that the
plant or
tree is animated
by a
spirit, who
must be
propitiated
before it is
safe to partake
of the
fruit.</note>
These customs of the Thompson and other Indian tribes
of North-West America are instructive, because they clearly
indicate the motive, or at least one of the motives, which
underlies the ceremonies observed at eating the first fruits of
the season. That motive in the case of these Indians is
simply a belief that the plant itself is animated by a
conscious and more or less powerful spirit, who must be
propitiated before the people can safely partake of the fruits
or roots which are supposed to be part of his body. Now if
this is true of wild fruits and roots, we may infer with some
probability that it is also true of cultivated fruits and roots,
such as yams, and in particular that it holds good of the
cereals, such as wheat, barley, oats, rice, and maize. In all
cases it seems reasonable to infer that the scruples which
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
savages manifest at eating the first fruits of any crop, and
the ceremonies which they observe before they overcome
their scruples, are due at least in large measure to a notion
that the plant or tree is animated by a spirit or even a deity,
whose leave must be obtained, or whose favour must be
sought before it is possible to partake with safety of the new
crop. This indeed is plainly affirmed of the Aino: they call
the millet <q>the divine cereal,</q> <q>the cereal deity,</q> and they
pray to and worship him before they will eat of the cakes
made from the new millet.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</note> And even where the indwelling
divinity of the first fruits is not expressly affirmed, it
appears to be implied both by the solemn preparations made
for eating them and by the danger supposed to be incurred
by persons who venture to partake of them without observing
the prescribed ritual. In all such cases, accordingly, we
may not improperly describe the eating of the new fruits as a
sacrament or communion with a deity, or at all events with
a powerful spirit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sanctity
of the
new fruits
indicated
in various
ways.
Care taken
to prevent
the contact
of sacred
and profane
food in the
stomach of
the eater. Contact
between
certain
foods in the
stomach of
the eater
forbidden.</note>
Among the usages which point to this conclusion are
the custom of employing either new or specially reserved
vessels to hold the new fruits,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</note> and the practice of
purifying the persons of the communicants and even the
houses and streets of the whole town, before it is lawful
to engage in the solemn act of communion with the
divinity.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</note> Of all the modes of purification adopted on these
occasions none perhaps brings out the sacramental virtue of
the rite so clearly as the Creek and Seminole practice of
taking a purgative before swallowing the new corn. The
intention is thereby to prevent the sacred food from being
polluted by contact with common food in the stomach of
the eater. For the same reason Catholics partake of the
Eucharist fasting; and among the pastoral Masai of Eastern
Africa the young warriors, who live on meat and milk
exclusively, are obliged to eat nothing but milk for so many
days and then nothing but meat for so many more, and
before they pass from the one food to the other they must
make sure that none of the old food remains in their
stomachs; this they do by swallowing a very powerful
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
purgative and emetic.<note place='foot'>Joseph Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>Through Masai
Land</hi> (London, 1885), p. 430; P.
Reichard, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Ostafrika</hi> (Leipsic,
1892), p. 288; O. Baumann, <hi rend='italic'>Durch
Massailand zur Nilquelle</hi> (Berlin,
1894), p. 162; M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi>
(Berlin, 1904), p. 33; M. Weiss, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Völkerstämme im Norden Deutsch-Ostafrikas</hi>
(Berlin, 1910), p. 380.
However, the motive which underlies
the taboo appears to be a fear of injuring
by sympathetic magic the cows from
which the milk is drawn. See my
essay <q>Folk-lore in the Old Testament,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Anthropological Essays presented
to E. B. Tylor</hi> (Oxford, 1907),
pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to Reichard
the warriors may partake of honey both
with meat and with milk. Thomson
does not mention honey and speaks of
a purgative only. The periods during
which meat and milk are alternately
consumed vary, according to Reichard,
from twelve to fifteen days. We may
conjecture, therefore, that two of them,
making up a complete cycle, correspond
to a lunar month, with reference
to which the diet is perhaps determined.</note> Similarly, among the Suk, a tribe of
British East Africa, no one may partake of meat and milk
on the same day, and if he has chewed raw millet he is
forbidden to drink milk for seven days.<note place='foot'>M. W. H. Beech, <hi rend='italic'>The Suk, their
Language and Folklore</hi> (Oxford, 1911),
p. 9. In both cases the motive, as
with the Masai, is probably a fear of
injuring the cattle, and especially of
causing the cows to loose their milk.
This is confirmed by other taboos of
the same sort observed by the Suk.
Thus they think that to eat the flesh of
a certain forest pig would cause the
cattle of the eater to run dry, and that
if a rich man ate fish his cows would
give no milk. See M. W. H. Beech,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 10.</note> Among the
Wataturu, another people of Eastern Africa akin to the
Masai, a warrior who had eaten antelope's flesh might not
drink of milk on the same day.<note place='foot'>O. Baumann, <hi rend='italic'>Durch Massailand
zur Nilquelle</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p. 171.</note> Similarly among the
Central Esquimaux the rules prohibiting contact between
venison and the flesh of marine animals are very strict. The
Esquimaux themselves say that the goddess Sedna dislikes
the deer, and therefore they may not bring that animal into
contact with her favourites, the sea beasts. Hence the
meat of the whale, the seal, or the walrus may not be eaten
on the same day with venison. Both sorts of meat may not
even lie on the floor of the hut or behind the lamps at the
same time. If a man who has eaten venison in the morning
happens to enter a hut in which the flesh of seal is being
cooked, he is allowed to eat venison on the bed, but it must
be wrapt up before being carried into the hut, and he
must take care to keep clear of the floor. Before changing
from one food to the other the Esquimaux must wash themselves.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Central Eskimo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1888), p.
595; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, vol. xv. part i. (New York,
1901) pp. 122-124. For more details
see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>,
pp. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Again, just as the Esquimaux think that their
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
goddess would be offended if venison met seal or whale or
walrus meat in the eater's stomach, so the Melanesians of
Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, believe that if a man
who has eaten pork or fish or shell-fish or the flesh of a
certain sort of cuscus were to enter a garden immediately
afterwards, the ghosts who preside over the garden and
cause the fruits to grow would be angry and the crop would
consequently suffer; but three or four days after partaking
of such victuals, when the food has quite left his stomach, he
may enter the garden without offence to the ghosts or injury
to the crop.<note place='foot'>Rev. R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi> (Oxford, 1891), p. 134.</note> In like manner the ancient Greeks, of whose
intellectual kinship with savages like the Esquimaux and the
Melanesians we have already met with many proofs, laid it
down as a rule that a man who had partaken of the black
ram offered to Pelops at Olympia might not enter into the
temple of Zeus, and that persons who had sacrificed to
Telephus at Pergamus might not go up to the temple of
Aesculapius until they had washed themselves,<note place='foot'>Pausanias, v. 13. 3. We may
assume, though Pausanias does not
expressly say so, that persons who
sacrificed to Telephus partook of the
sacrifice.</note> just as the
Esquimaux who have eaten venison must wash before they
may partake of seal or whale or walrus meat. Again, at
Lindus in Rhodes there was a sanctuary of some god or hero
unknown into which no one who had partaken of goat's flesh
or peas-pudding might enter for three days, and no one who
had eaten cheese might enter for one day.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 576 (vol. ii.
p. 267); Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi>, No. 723, p. 622.
Further, no one who had suffered a
domestic bereavement might enter the
sanctuary for forty days. Hence the
pollution of death was clearly deemed
more virulent, or at all events more
lasting, than the pollution of food.</note> The prescribed
interval was probably calculated to allow the obnoxious food
to pass out of the body of the eater before he entered into
the presence of the deity, who for some reason or other
cherished an antipathy to these particular viands. At
Castabus in the Carian Chersonese there was a sanctuary of
Hemithea, which no one might approach who had either
eaten pork or touched a pig.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, v. 62. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sacrament
of
first-fruits
sometimes
combined
with a
sacrifice of
them to
gods or
spirits.</note>
In some of the festivals which we have examined, as
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
in the Cheremiss, Buru, Cham, Ewe, and Creek ceremonies,
the sacrament of first-fruits is combined with a sacrifice or
presentation of them to gods or spirits,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</note> and in course of
time the sacrifice of first-fruits tends to throw the sacrament
into the shade, if not to supersede it. The mere fact of
offering the first-fruits to the gods or spirits comes now to
be thought a sufficient preparation for eating the new corn;
the higher powers having received their share, man is free to
enjoy the rest. This mode of viewing the new fruits implies
that they are regarded no longer as themselves instinct with
divine life, but merely as a gift bestowed by the gods upon
man, who is bound to express his gratitude and homage to
his divine benefactors by returning to them a portion of
their bounty. More examples of the sacrifice, as distinct
from sacrament, of first-fruits will be given presently.<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Eating the God among the Aztecs.'/>
<head>§ 2. Eating the God among the Aztecs.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Aztec custom
of eating
sacramentally
a
dough
image of
the god
Huitzilopochtli
or
Vitzilipuztli
as a mode
of communion
with the
deity.</note>
The custom of eating bread sacramentally as the body of
a god was practised by the Aztecs before the discovery and
conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards. Twice a year, in
May and December, an image of the great Mexican god
Huitzilopochtli or Vitzilipuztli was made of dough, then
broken in pieces, and solemnly eaten by his worshippers. The
May ceremony is thus described by the historian Acosta:
<q>The Mexicans in the month of May made their principal
feast to their god Vitzilipuztli, and two days before this
feast, the virgins whereof I have spoken (the which were
shut up and secluded in the same temple and were as it
were religious women) did mingle a quantity of the seed of
beets with roasted maize, and then they did mould it with
honey, making an idol of that paste in bigness like to that
of wood, putting instead of eyes grains of green glass, of blue
or white; and for teeth grains of maize set forth with all
the ornament and furniture that I have said. This being
finished, all the noblemen came and brought it an exquisite
and rich garment, like unto that of the idol, wherewith they
did attire it. Being thus clad and deckt, they did set it in
an azured chair and in a litter to carry it on their shoulders.
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
The morning of this feast being come, an hour before day
all the maidens came forth attired in white, with new
ornaments, the which that day were called the Sisters of
their god Vitzilipuztli, they came crowned with garlands of
maize roasted and parched, being like unto azahar or the
flower of orange; and about their necks they had great
chains of the same, which went bauldrickwise under their left
arm. Their cheeks were dyed with vermilion, their arms
from the elbow to the wrist were covered with red parrots'
feathers.</q> Young men, dressed in red robes and crowned
like the virgins with maize, then carried the idol in its litter
to the foot of the great pyramid-shaped temple, up the steep
and narrow steps of which it was drawn to the music of
flutes, trumpets, cornets, and drums. <q rend='pre'>While they mounted
up the idol all the people stood in the court with much
reverence and fear. Being mounted to the top, and that
they had placed it in a little lodge of roses which they held
ready, presently came the young men, which strewed many
flowers of sundry kinds, wherewith they filled the temple
both within and without. This done, all the virgins came
out of their convent, bringing pieces of paste compounded of
beets and roasted maize, which was of the same paste
whereof their idol was made and compounded, and they
were of the fashion of great bones. They delivered them to
the young men, who carried them up and laid them at the
idol's feet, wherewith they filled the whole place that it could
receive no more. They called these morsels of paste the
flesh and bones of Vitzilipuztli. Having laid abroad these
bones, presently came all the ancients of the temple, priests,
Levites, and all the rest of the ministers, according to their
dignities and antiquities (for herein there was a strict order
amongst them) one after another, with their veils of diverse
colours and works, every one according to his dignity and
office, having garlands upon their heads and chains of flowers
about their necks; after them came their gods and goddesses
whom they worshipped, of diverse figures, attired in the same
livery; then putting themselves in order about those morsels
and pieces of paste, they used certain ceremonies with singing
and dancing. By means whereof they were blessed and
consecrated for the flesh and bones of this idol. This
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
ceremony and blessing (whereby they were taken for the
flesh and bones of the idol) being ended, they honoured those
pieces in the same sort as their god.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Eating the
flesh and
bones of
the god
Vitzilipuztli
sacramentally.</note>
<q>Then come forth the sacrificers, who began the sacrifice
of men in the manner as hath been spoken, and that day
they did sacrifice a greater number than at any other time,
for that it was the most solemn feast they observed. The
sacrifices being ended, all the young men and maids came
out of the temple attired as before, and being placed in
order and rank, one directly against another, they danced
by drums, the which sounded in praise of the feast, and of
the idol which they did celebrate. To which song all the
most ancient and greatest noblemen did answer dancing
about them, making a great circle, as their use is, the young
men and maids remaining always in the midst. All the
city came to this goodly spectacle, and there was a commandment
very strictly observed throughout all the land, that
the day of the feast of the idol of Vitzilipuztli they should
eat no other meat but this paste, with honey, whereof the
idol was made. And this should be eaten at the point of
day, and they should drink no water nor any other thing
till after noon: they held it for an ill sign, yea, for sacrilege
to do the contrary: but after the ceremonies ended, it was
lawful for them to eat anything. During the time of this
ceremony they hid the water from their little children,
admonishing all such as had the use of reason not to drink
any water; which, if they did, the anger of God would come
upon them, and they should die, which they did observe
very carefully and strictly. The ceremonies, dancing,
and sacrifice ended, they went to unclothe themselves, and
the priests and superiors of the temple took the idol of
paste, which they spoiled of all the ornaments it had, and
made many pieces, as well of the idol itself as of the
truncheons which they consecrated, and then they gave
them to the people in manner of a communion, beginning
with the greater, and continuing unto the rest, both men,
women, and little children, who received it with such
tears, fear, and reverence as it was an admirable thing, saying
that they did eat the flesh and bones of God, wherewith
they were grieved. Such as had any sick folks demanded
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
thereof for them, and carried it with great reverence and
veneration.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral
History of the Indies</hi>, bk. v. ch. 24,
vol. ii. pp. 356-360 (Hakluyt Society,
London, 1880). I have modernised
the old translator's spelling. Acosta's
authority, which he followed without
acknowledgment, was an anonymous
writer of about the middle of the
sixteenth century, whose manuscript,
written in Spanish, was found in the
library of the Franciscan monastery at
Mexico in 1856. A French translation
of it has been published. See <hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit
Ramirez, Histoire de l'Origine
des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle-Espagne
selon leurs traditions</hi>, publié
par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), pp.
149-154. Acosta's description is followed
by A. de Herrera (<hi rend='italic'>General
History of the vast Continent and
Islands of America</hi>, translated by Capt.
John Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iii.
213-215).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The doctrine
of
transubstantiation
or the
magical
conversion
of bread
into flesh
recognised
by the
ancient
Aztecs and
Brahmans.</note>
From this interesting passage we learn that the ancient
Mexicans, even before the arrival of Christian missionaries,
were fully acquainted with the theological doctrine of transubstantiation
and acted upon it in the solemn rites of
their religion. They believed that by consecrating bread
their priests could turn it into the very body of their god,
so that all who thereupon partook of the consecrated bread
entered into a mystic communion with the deity by receiving
a portion of his divine substance into themselves. The
doctrine of transubstantiation, or the magical conversion
of bread into flesh, was also familiar to the Aryans of ancient
India long before the spread and even the rise of Christianity.
The Brahmans taught that the rice-cakes offered in sacrifice
were substitutes for human beings, and that they were
actually converted into the real bodies of men by the
manipulation of the priest. We read that <q>when it (the
rice-cake) still consists of rice-meal, it is the hair. When he
pours water on it, it becomes skin. When he mixes it, it
becomes flesh: for then it becomes consistent; and
consistent also is the flesh. When it is baked, it becomes
bone: for then it becomes somewhat hard; and hard is the
bone. And when he is about to take it off (the fire) and
sprinkles it with butter, he changes it into marrow. This
is the completeness which they call the fivefold animal
sacrifice.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha-Brâhmana</hi>, translated
by J. Eggeling, Part i. (Oxford,
1882) p. 51 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the East</hi>,
vol. xii.).</note> These remarkable transformations, daily wrought
by the priest, on the rice-wafer, were, however, nothing at
all to those which the gods themselves accomplished when
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
they first instituted the rite. For the horse and the ox
which they sacrificed became a <foreign rend='italic'>bos gaurus</foreign> and a gayal
respectively; the sheep was turned into a camel; and the goat
was converted into a remarkable species of deer, enriched
with eight legs, which slew lions and elephants.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> pp. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, with the
translator's note.</note> On the
whole it would seem that neither the ancient Hindoos nor
the ancient Mexicans had much to learn from the most
refined mysteries of Catholic theology.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sacred
food not to
be defiled
by contact
with common
food.</note>
Now, too, we can perfectly understand why on the day
of their solemn communion with the deity the Mexicans
refused to eat any other food than the consecrated bread
which they revered as the very flesh and bones of their
God, and why up till noon they might drink nothing at all,
not even water. They feared no doubt to defile the portion
of God in their stomachs by contact with common things.
A similar pious fear led the Creek and Seminole Indians, as
we saw, to adopt the more thoroughgoing expedient of
rinsing out their insides by a strong purgative before they
dared to partake of the sacrament of first-fruits.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> We can
now also conjecture the reason why Zulu boys, after eating
the flesh of the black bull at the feast of first-fruits, are
forbidden to drink anything till the next day.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, note 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Aztec
custom of
killing the
god Huitzilopochtli
in effigy
and eating
him afterwards.</note>
At the festival of the winter solstice in December the
Aztecs killed their god Huitzilopochtli in effigy first and
ate him afterwards. As a preparation for this solemn
ceremony an image of the deity in the likeness of a man was
fashioned out of seeds of various sorts, which were kneaded
into a dough with the blood of children. The bones of the
god were represented by pieces of acacia wood. This image
was placed on the chief altar of the temple, and on the day
of the festival the king offered incense to it. Early next day
it was taken down and set on its feet in a great hall. Then
a priest, who bore the name and acted the part of the god
Quetzalcoatl, took a flint-tipped dart and hurled it into the
breast of the dough-image, piercing it through and through.
This was called <q>killing the god Huitzilopochtli so that his
body might be eaten.</q> One of the priests cut out the heart
of the image and gave it to the king to eat. The rest of
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
the image was divided into minute pieces, of which every man
great and small, down to the male children in the cradle,
received one to eat. But no woman might taste a morsel.
The ceremony was called <foreign rend='italic'>teoqualo</foreign>, that is, <q>god is eaten.</q><note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races
of the Pacific States</hi> (London, 1875-1876),
iii. 297-300 (after Torquemada);
F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History
of Mexico</hi>, translated by Ch. Cullen
(London, 1807), i. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; B. de
Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire générale des choses
de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi>, traduite et
annotée par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon
(Paris, 1880), pp. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. G. Müller,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen</hi>
(Bâle, 1867), p. 605;
Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
Nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
iii. 531-534.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mexican
custom of
eating
images of
dough.</note>
At another festival the Mexicans made little images like
men, which stood for the cloud-capped mountains. These
images were moulded of a paste of various seeds and were
dressed in paper ornaments. Some people fashioned five,
others ten, others as many as fifteen of them. Having been
made, they were placed in the oratory of each house and
worshipped. Four times in the course of the night offerings
of food were brought to them in tiny vessels; and people
sang and played the flute before them through all the
hours of darkness. At break of day the priests stabbed
the images with a weaver's instrument, cut off their heads,
and tore out their hearts, which they presented to the
master of the house on a green saucer. The bodies of the
images were then eaten by all the family, especially by the
servants, <q>in order that by eating them they might be preserved
from certain distempers, to which those persons who
were negligent of worship to those deities conceived themselves
to be subject.</q><note place='foot'>F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 311;
B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 74, 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. G. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 606; H. H. Bancroft,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 316; Brasseur de Bourbourg,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 535. This festival
took place on the last day of 16th
month (which extended from 23rd
December to 11th January). At
another festival the Mexicans made the
semblance of a bone out of paste and
ate it sacramentally as the bone of the
god. See Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 33.</note> In some cities of Mexico, as in
Tlacopan and Coyohuacan, an idol was fashioned out of
grains of various kinds, and the warriors ate it in the belief
that the sacred food would increase their forces fourfold
when they marched to the fight.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
iii. 539.</note> At certain festivals held
thrice a year in Nicaragua all the men, beginning with the
priests and chiefs, drew blood from their tongues and genital
organs with sharp knives of flint, allowed it to drip on some
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
sheaves of maize, and then ate the bloody grain as a blessed
food.<note place='foot'>G. F. de Oviedo, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire du
Nicaragua</hi> (Paris, 1840), p. 219.
Oviedo's account is borrowed by A. de
Herrera (<hi rend='italic'>General History of the vast
Continent and Islands of America</hi>,
translated by Capt. John Stevens, iii.
301).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mexican
custom of
eating a
man as a
human embodiment
of the god
Tetzcatlipoca.</note>
But the Mexicans did not always content themselves
with eating their gods in the outward and visible shape of
bread or grain; it was not even enough that this material
vehicle of the divine life should be kneaded and fortified
with human blood. They craved, as it seems, after a closer
union with the living god, and attained it by devouring the
flesh of a real man, who, after he had paraded for a time
in the trappings and received the honours of a god, was
slaughtered and eaten by his cannibal worshippers. The
deity thus consumed in effigy was Tetzcatlipoca, and the
man chosen to represent him and die in his stead was a
young captive of handsome person and illustrious birth.
During his captivity the youth thus doomed to play the
fatal part of divinity was allowed to range the streets of
Mexico freely, escorted by a distinguished train, who paid
him as much respect as if he had been indeed the god himself
instead of only his living image. Twenty days before
the festival at which the tragic mockery was to end, that he
might taste all the joys of this transient world to which he
must soon bid farewell, he received in marriage four women,
from whom he parted only when he took his place in the last
solemn procession. Arrived at the foot of the sacred pyramid
on the top of which he was to die, the sacrificers saluted
him and led him up the long staircase. On the summit
five of them seized him and held him down on his back
upon the sacrificial stone, while the high priest, after bowing
to the god he was about to kill, cut open his breast and tore
out the throbbing heart with the accustomed rites. But
instead of being kicked down the staircase and sent rolling
from step to step like the corpses of common victims, the
body of the dead god was carried respectfully down, and his
flesh, chopped up small, was distributed among the priests
and nobles as a blessed food. The head, being severed from
the trunk, was preserved in a sacred place along with the
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
white and grinning skulls of all the other victims who had
lived and died in the character of the god Tetzcatlipoca.<note place='foot'>J. de Torquemada, <hi rend='italic'>Monarquia
Indiana</hi>, lib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. pp.
259 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (Madrid, 1723); Brasseur de
Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 510-512.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Communion
with a god
by eating
of his effigy
among the
Huichol
Indians of
Mexico
and the
Malas of
Southern
India. Catholic
custom of
eating
effigies of
the
Madonna.</note>
The custom of entering into communion with a god by
eating of his effigy survived till lately among the Huichol
Indians of Mexico. In a narrow valley, at the foot of
a beetling crag of red rock, they have a small thatched
temple of the God of fire, and here down to recent years
stood a small image of the deity in human form roughly
carved out of solidified volcanic ash. The idol was very
dirty and smeared with blood, and in his right side was a
hole, which owed its existence to the piety and devotion of
his worshippers. For they believed that the power of healing
and a knowledge of mysteries could be acquired by eating
a little of the god's holy body, and accordingly shamans, or
medicine-men, who desired to lay in a stock of these accomplishments,
so useful in the exercise of their profession, were
wont to repair to the temple, where, having deposited an
offering of food or a votive bowl, they scraped off with their
finger-nails some particles of the god's body and swallowed
them. After engaging in this form of communion with the
deity they had to abstain from salt and from all carnal converse
with their wives for five months.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), ii. 166-171. When
Mr. Lumholtz revisited the temple in
1898, the idol had disappeared. It
has probably been since replaced by
another. The custom of abstaining
both from salt and from women as
a mode of ceremonial purification is
common among savage and barbarous
peoples. See above, p. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> (as to the
Yuchi Indians), and <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, iv. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, the Malas, a
caste of pariahs in Southern India, communicate with the goddess
Sunkalamma by eating her effigy. The communion takes
place at marriage. An image of the goddess in the form of
a truncated cone is made out of rice and green grain cooked
together, and it is decorated with a nose jewel, garlands,
and other religious symbols. Offerings of rice, frankincense,
camphor, and a coco-nut are then made to the image, and a
ram or he-goat is sacrificed. After the sacrifice has been
presented, all the persons assembled prostrate themselves in
silence before the image, then they break it in pieces, and
distributing the pieces among themselves they swallow them.
In this way they are, no doubt, believed to absorb the divine
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
essence of the goddess whose broken body has just passed
into their stomachs.<note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes
of Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), iv.
357 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Europe the Catholic Church has
resorted to similar means for enabling the pious to enjoy
the ineffable privilege of eating the persons of the Infant
God and his Mother. For this purpose images of the
Madonna are printed on some soluble and harmless substance
and sold in sheets like postage stamps. The worshipper
buys as many of these sacred emblems as he has occasion
for, and affixing one or more of them to his food swallows
the bolus. The practice is not confined to the poor and
ignorant. In his youth Count von Hoensbroech and his
devout mother used thus to consume portions of God and
his Mother with their meals.<note place='foot'>Graf Paul von Hoensbroech, <hi rend='italic'>14
Jahre Jesuit</hi> (Leipsic, 1909-1910), i.
25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The practice was officially
sanctioned by a decree of the Inquisition,
29th July 1903.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Many Manii at Aricia.'/>
<head>§ 3. Many Manii at Aricia.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Loaves
called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Maniae</foreign>
baked at
Aricia.
Woollen
effigies
dedicated
at Rome
to Mania,
the Mother
or Grandmother
of
Ghosts, at
the Compitalia. The loaves
at Aricia
perhaps
sacramental
bread
made in
the likeness
of the
King of
the Wood. Practice of
putting up
dummies to
divert the
attention
of ghosts
or demons
from living
people.</note>
We are now able to suggest an explanation of the proverb
<q>There are many Manii at Aricia.</q><note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 22.</note> Certain loaves
made in the shape of men were called by the Romans
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maniae</foreign>, and it appears that this kind of loaf was especially
made at Aricia.<note place='foot'>Festus, ed. C. O. Müller, pp.
128, 129, 145. The reading of the
last passage is, however, uncertain (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et
Ariciae genus panni fieri; quod manici
† appelletur</foreign></q>).</note> Now, Mania, the name of one of these
loaves, was also the name of the Mother or Grandmother of
Ghosts,<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, ix. 61;
Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus nationes</hi>, iii. 41;
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 7. 35; Festus,
p. 128, ed. C. O. Müller. Festus
speaks of the mother or grandmother
of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>larvae</foreign>; the other writers speak
of the mother of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lares</foreign>.</note> to whom woollen effigies of men and women were
dedicated at the festival of the Compitalia. These effigies
were hung at the doors of all the houses in Rome; one
effigy was hung up for every free person in the house, and
one effigy, of a different kind, for every slave. The reason
was that on this day the ghosts of the dead were believed
to be going about, and it was hoped that, either out of
good nature or through simple inadvertence, they would
carry off the effigies at the door instead of the living people
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
in the house. According to tradition, these woollen figures
were substitutes for a former custom of sacrificing human
beings.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Festus, pp. 121,
239, ed. C. O. Müller. The effigies
hung up for the slaves were called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pilae</foreign>, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maniae</foreign>. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pilae</foreign> was also the
name given to the straw-men which
were thrown to the bulls to gore in the
arena. See Martial, <hi rend='italic'>Epigr.</hi> ii. 43. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Asconius,<hi rend='italic'> In Cornel.</hi> p. 55, ed. Kiessling
and Schoell.</note> Upon data so fragmentary and uncertain, it is
impossible to build with confidence; but it seems worth
suggesting that the loaves in human form, which appear
to have been baked at Aricia, were sacramental bread,
and that in the old days, when the divine King of the
Wood was annually slain, loaves were made in his image,
like the paste figures of the gods in Mexico, India, and
Europe, and were eaten sacramentally by his worshippers.<note place='foot'>The ancients were at least familiar
with the practice of sacrificing images
made of dough or other materials as
substitutes for the animals themselves.
It was a recognised principle that
when an animal could not be easily
obtained for sacrifice, it was lawful
to offer an image of it made of bread
or wax. See Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi>
ii. 116; compare Pausanias, x. 18. 5.
Poor people who could not afford to
sacrifice real animals offered dough
images of them (Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> βοῦς
ἕβδομος; compare Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi>
βοῦς, ἕβδομος βοῦς). Hence bakers
made a regular business of baking
cakes in the likeness of all the animals
which were sacrificed to the gods (Proculus,
quoted and emended by Chr.
A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 1079).
When Cyzicus was besieged by Mithridates
and the people could not procure
a black cow to sacrifice at the rites of
Persephone, they made a cow of dough
and placed it at the altar (Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Lucullus</hi>, 10). In a Boeotian sacrifice
to Hercules, in place of the ram which
was the proper victim, an apple was
regularly substituted, four chips being
stuck in it to represent legs and two to
represent horns (Julius Pollux, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).
The Athenians are said to have once
offered to Hercules a similar substitute
for an ox (Zenobius, <hi rend='italic'>Cent.</hi> v. 22). And
the Locrians, being at a loss for an ox
to sacrifice, made one out of figs and
sticks, and offered it instead of the
animal (Zenobius, <hi rend='italic'>Cent.</hi> v. 5). At
the Athenian festival of the Diasia
cakes shaped like animals were sacrificed
(Schol. on Thucydides, i. 126,
p. 36, ed. Didot). We have seen above
(p. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>) that the poorer Egyptians
offered cakes of dough instead of
pigs. The Cheremiss of Russia sometimes
offer cakes in the shape of horses
instead of the real animals. See
P. v. Stenin, <q>Ein neuer Beitrag
zur Ethnographie der Tscheremissen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lviii. (1890) pp. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Similarly a North-American Indian
dreamed that a sacrifice of twenty
elans was necessary for the recovery
of a sick girl; but the elans could not
be procured, and the girl's parents
were allowed to sacrifice twenty loaves
instead. See <hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>,
1636, p. 11 (Canadian reprint, Quebec,
1858).</note>
The Mexican sacraments in honour of Huitzilopochtli were
also accompanied by the sacrifice of human victims. The
tradition that the founder of the sacred grove at Aricia was
a man named Manius, from whom many Manii were
descended, would thus be an etymological myth invented to
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
explain the name <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maniae</foreign> as applied to these sacramental
loaves. A dim recollection of the original connexion of the
loaves with human sacrifices may perhaps be traced in the
story that the effigies dedicated to Mania at the Compitalia
were substitutes for human victims. The story itself, however,
is probably devoid of foundation, since the practice of
putting up dummies to divert the attention of ghosts or
demons from living people is not uncommon. As the
practice is both widely spread and very characteristic of the
manner of thought of primitive man, who tries in a thousand
ways to outwit the malice of spiritual beings, I may be
pardoned for devoting a few pages to its illustration, even
though in doing so I diverge somewhat from the strict line
of argument. I would ask the reader to observe that the
vicarious use of images, with which we are here concerned,
differs wholly in principle from the sympathetic use of them
which we examined before;<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and that while the sympathetic
use belongs purely to magic, the vicarious use falls within
the domain of religion.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tibetan
custom of
putting
effigies at
the doors
of houses
to deceive
demons.</note>
The Tibetans stand in fear of innumerable earth-demons,
all of whom are under the authority of Old Mother Khön-ma.
This goddess, who may be compared to the Roman Mania,
the Mother or Grandmother of Ghosts, is dressed in golden-yellow
robes, holds a golden noose in her hand, and rides on
a ram. In order to bar the dwelling-house against the foul
fiends, of whom Old Mother Khön-ma is mistress, an
elaborate structure somewhat resembling a chandelier is
fixed above the door on the outside of the house. It contains
a ram's skull, a variety of precious objects such as gold-leaf,
silver, and turquoise, also some dry food, such as rice, wheat,
and pulse, and finally images or pictures of a man, a woman,
and a house. <q>The object of these figures of a man, wife,
and house is to deceive the demons should they still come
in spite of this offering, and to mislead them into the belief
that the foregoing pictures are the inmates of the house, so
that they may wreak their wrath on these bits of wood and
so save the real human occupants.</q> When all is ready, a
priest prays to Old Mother Khön-ma that she would be
pleased to accept these dainty offerings and to close the open
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
doors of the earth, in order that the demons may not come
forth to infest and injure the household.<note place='foot'>L. A. Waddell, <hi rend='italic'>The Buddhism of
Tibet</hi> (London, 1895), pp. 484-486.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigies
buried with
the dead in
order to deceive
their
ghosts.</note>
Further, it is often supposed that the spirits of persons
who have recently departed this life are apt to carry
off with them to the world of the dead the souls of their
surviving relations. Hence the savage resorts to the
device of making up of dummies or effigies which he
puts in the way of the ghost, hoping that the dull-witted
spirit will mistake them for real people and so
leave the survivors in peace. Hence in Tahiti the priest
who performed the funeral rites used to lay some slips
of plantain leaf-stalk on the breast and under the arms of
the corpse, saying, <q>There are your family, there is your
child, there is your wife, there is your father, and there is
your mother. Be satisfied yonder (that is, in the world of
spirits). Look not towards those who are left in the world.</q>
This ceremony, we are told, was designed <q>to impart contentment
to the departed, and to prevent the spirit from
repairing to the places of his former resort, and so distressing
the survivors.</q><note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836),
i. 402.</note> When the Galelareese bury a corpse, they
bury with it the stem of a banana-tree for company, in order
that the dead person may not seek a companion among the
living. Just as the coffin is being lowered into the earth,
one of the bystanders steps up and throws a young banana-tree
into the grave, saying, <q>Friend, you must miss your
companions of this earth; here, take this as a comrade.</q><note place='foot'>M. J. van Baarda, <q>Fabelen,
Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
xlv. (1895) p. 539.</note>
In the Banks Islands, Melanesia, the ghost of a woman who
has died in childbed cannot go away to Panoi or ghost-land
if her child lives, for she cannot leave the baby behind.
Hence to bilk her ghost they tie up a piece of banana-trunk
loosely in leaves and lay it on her bosom in the grave.
So away she goes, thinking she has her baby with her, and
as she goes the banana-stalk keeps slipping about in the
leaves, and she fancies it is the child stirring at her breast.
Thus she is happy, till she comes to ghost-land and finds she
has been deceived; for a baby of banana-stalk cannot pass
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
muster among the ghosts. So back she comes tearing in
grief and rage to look for the child; but meantime the infant
has been artfully removed to another house, where the dead
mother cannot find it, though she looks for it everywhere.<note place='foot'>Rev. R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>
(Oxford, 1891), p. 275.</note>
In the Pelew Islands, when a woman has died in childbed,
her spirit comes and cries, <q>Give me the child!</q>
So to beguile her they bury the stem of a young banana-tree
with her body, cutting it short and laying it between her
right arm and her breast.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin,
1888), i. 9.</note> The same device is adopted for
the same purpose in the island of Timor.<note place='foot'>W. M. Donselaar, <q>Aanteekeningen
over het eiland Saleijer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
i. (1857) p. 290.</note> In like circumstances
negroes of the Niger Delta force a piece of the stem
of a plantain into the womb of the dead mother, in order to
make her think that she has her babe with her and so to
prevent her spirit from coming back to claim the living child.<note place='foot'>Le Comte C. N. de Cardi, <q>Ju-ju
laws and customs in the Niger
Delta,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxix. (1899) p. 58.</note>
Among the Yorubas of West Africa, when one of twins dies,
the mother carries about, along with the surviving child, a
small wooden figure roughly fashioned in human shape and of
the sex of the dead twin. This figure is intended not merely
to keep the live child from pining for its lost comrade, but
also to give the spirit of the dead child something into which
it can enter without disturbing its little brother or sister.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi> (London,
1894), p. 80.</note>
Among the Tschwi of West Africa a lady observed a sickly
child with an image beside it which she took for a doll.
But it was no doll, it was an effigy of the child's dead twin
which was being kept near the survivor as a habitation for
the little ghost, lest it should wander homeless and, feeling
lonely, call its companion away after it along the dark
road of death.<note place='foot'>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in West Africa</hi> (London, 1897), p.
473.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fictitious
burials to
divert the
attention
of demons
from the
real burials.</note>
At Onitsha, a town on the left bank of the Niger,
a missionary once met a funeral procession which he
describes as very singular. The real body had already been
buried in the house, but a piece of wood in the form of a
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
sofa and covered up was being borne by two persons on
their heads, attended by a procession of six men and six
women. The men carried cutlasses and the women clapped
their hands as they passed along each street, crying, <q>This
is the dead body of him that is dead, and is gone into the
world of spirits.</q> Meantime the rest of the villagers had to
keep indoors.<note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>
(London, 1859), pp. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The sham corpse was probably intended as
a lure to draw away prowling demons from the real body.
So among the Angoni, who inhabit the western bank of
Lake Nyassa, there is a common belief that demons hover
about the dying and dead before burial in order to snatch
away their souls to join their own evil order. Guns are
fired and drums are beaten to repel these spiritual foes,
but a surer way of baulking their machinations is to have a
mock funeral and so mislead and confound them. A sham
corpse is made up out of anything that comes to hand, and
it is treated exactly as if it were what it pretends to be.
This lay figure is then carried some distance to a grave,
followed by a great crowd weeping and wailing as if their
hearts would break, while the rub-a-dub of drums and the
discharge of guns add to the uproar. Meantime the real
corpse is being interred as quietly and stealthily as possible
near the house. Thus the demons are baffled; for when
the dummy corpse has been laid in the earth with every mark
of respect, and the noisy crowd has dispersed, the fiends swoop
down on the mock grave only to find a bundle of rushes or
some such trash in it; but the true grave they do not know
and cannot find.<note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <q>East Central
African Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxii. (1893)
pp. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Myth and Religion</hi>
(London, 1893), pp. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (from
MS. notes of Dr. Elmslie).</note> Similarly among the Bakundu of the
Cameroons two graves are always made, one in the hut of
the deceased and another somewhere else, and no one knows
where the corpse is really buried. The custom is apparently
intended to guard the knowledge of the real grave from
demons, who might make an ill use of the body, if not of
the soul, of the departed.<note place='foot'>B. Schwarz, <hi rend='italic'>Kamerun</hi> (Leipsic,
1886), pp. 256 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Reclus, <hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle
Géographie Universelle</hi>, xiii. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In like manner the Kamilaroi
tribe of Australia are reported to make two graves, a real
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
one and an empty one, for the purpose of cheating a malevolent
spirit called Krooben.<note place='foot'>J. Fraser, <q>The Aborigines of New
South Wales,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal and Proceedings
of the Royal Society of New South Wales</hi>,
xvi. (1882) p. 229; A. W. Howitt,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</hi>
(London, 1904), p. 467.</note> So, too, some of the Nagas of
Assam dig two graves, a sham grave made conspicuous on
purpose to attract the notice of the evil spirits, and the real
grave made inconspicuous to escape their attention: a figure
is set up over the false grave.<note place='foot'>This I learned from Dr. Burton
Brown (formerly of 3 Via Venti Setembri,
Rome), who lived for some time
among the Nagas.</note> Isis is said to have made
many false graves of the dead Osiris in Egypt in order that
his foe Typhon might not be able to find the true one.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xvii. 1. 23, p. 803; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18.</note> In
Bombay, if a person dies on an unlucky day, a dough figure
of a man is carried on the bier with him and burnt with his
corpse. This is supposed to hinder a second death from
occurring in the family,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. p.
39, § 240 (December 1884).</note> probably because the demons
are thought to take the dough figure instead of a real
person.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigies
used to cure
or prevent
sickness by
deluding
the demons
of disease
or inducing
them to
accept the
effigies instead
of the
persons.</note>
Again, effigies are often employed as a means of preventing
or curing sickness; the demons of disease either mistake
the effigies for living people or are persuaded or compelled
to enter them, leaving the real men and women well and
whole.<note place='foot'>Some examples of this vicarious
use of images as substitutes for the sick
have been given in an earlier part of
this work. See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils
of the Soul</hi>, pp. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus the Alfoors of Minahassa, in Celebes, will
sometimes transport a sick man to another house, while they
leave on his bed a dummy made up of a pillow and clothes.
This dummy the demon is supposed to mistake for the sick
man, who consequently recovers.<note place='foot'>N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>,
(Rotterdam, 1869), i. 326.</note> Cure or prevention of
this sort seems to find especial favour with the Dyaks of
Borneo. Thus, when an epidemic is raging among them,
the Dyaks of the Katoengouw river set up wooden images
at their doors in the hope that the demons of the plague
may be deluded into carrying off the effigies instead of the
people.<note place='foot'>P. J. Veth, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo's Wester-Afdeeling</hi>
(Zaltbommel, 1854-56), ii. 309.</note> Among the Oloh Ngadju of Borneo, when a sick
man is supposed to be suffering from the assaults of a ghost,
puppets of dough or rice-meal are made and thrown under
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
the house as substitutes for the patient, who thus rids himself
of the ghost. So if a man has been attacked by a crocodile
and has contrived to escape, he makes a puppet of dough or
meal and casts it into the water as a vicarious offering;
otherwise the water-god, who is conceived in the shape of a
crocodile, might be angry.<note place='foot'>F. Grabowsky, <q>Ueber verschiedene
weniger bekannte Opfer bei den
Oloh Ngadju in Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, i.
(1888) pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In certain of the western districts
of Borneo if a man is taken suddenly and violently
sick, the physician, who in this part of the world is generally
an old woman, fashions a wooden image and brings it seven
times into contact with the sufferer's head, while she says:
<q>This image serves to take the place of the sick man; sickness,
pass over into the image.</q> Then, with some rice, salt,
and tobacco in a little basket, the substitute is carried to the
spot where the evil spirit is supposed to have entered into
the man. There it is set upright on the ground, after the
physician has invoked the spirit as follows: <q>O devil, here
is an image which stands instead of the sick man. Release
the soul of the sick man and plague the image, for it is
indeed prettier and better than he.</q> Similar substitutes are
used almost daily by these Dyaks for the purpose of drawing
off evil influences from anybody's person. Thus, when
an Ot Danom baby will not stop squalling, its maternal
grandmother takes a large leaf, fashions it into a puppet to
represent the child, and presses it against the infant's body.
Having thus decanted the spirit, so to speak, from the baby
into the puppet, she pierces the effigy with little arrows from
a blow-gun, thereby killing the spirit that had vexed her
child.<note place='foot'>E. L. M. Kühr, <q>Schetsen uit
Borneo's Westerafdeeling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xlvii. (1897)
pp. 60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For another mode in which
these same Dyaks seek to heal sickness
by means of an image, see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and
the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly in the island of Dama, between New
Guinea and Celebes, where sickness is ascribed to the agency
of demons, the doctor makes a doll of palm-leaf and lays it,
together with some betel, rice, and half of an empty eggshell,
on the patient's head. Lured by this bait the demon
quits the sufferer's body and enters the palm-leaf doll, which
the wily doctor thereupon promptly decapitates. This may
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
reasonably be supposed to make an end of the demon and of the
sickness together.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), p. 465.</note> A Dyak sorcerer, being called in to prescribe
for a little boy who suffered from a disorder of the
stomach, constructed two effigies of the boy and his mother
out of bundles of clothes and offered them, together with some
of the parents' finery, to the devil who was plaguing the child;
it was hoped that the demon would take the effigies and
leave the boy.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <q>Low's Natives of
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxi. (1892) p. 117.</note> Batta magicians can conjure the demon of
disease out of the patient's body into an image made out of
a banana-tree with a human face and wrapt up in magic
herbs; the image is then hurriedly removed and thrown
away or buried beyond the boundaries of the village.<note place='foot'>B. Hagen, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Battareligion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxviii. (1883) p. 531.</note>
Sometimes the image, dressed as a man or a woman according
to the sex of the patient, is deposited at a cross-road
or other thoroughfare, in the hope that some passer-by, seeing
it, may start and cry out, <q>Ah! So-and-So is dead</q>;
for such an exclamation is supposed to delude the demon of
disease into a belief that he has accomplished his fell purpose,
so he takes himself off and leaves the sufferer to get well.<note place='foot'>M. Joustra, <q>Het leven, de zeden
en gewoonten der Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlvi. (1902) pp.
413 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Mai Darat, a Sakai tribe of the Malay Peninsula,
attribute all kinds of diseases to the agency of spirits which
they call <foreign rend='italic'>nyani</foreign>; fortunately, however, the magician can
induce these maleficent beings to come out of the sick
person and take up their abode in rude figures of grass,
which are hung up outside the houses in little bell-shaped
shrines decorated with peeled sticks.<note place='foot'>N. Annandale and H. C. Robinson,
<q>Some Preliminary Results of an Expedition
to the Malay Peninsula,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 416.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigies
used to
divert the
attention of
demons in
Nias and
various
parts of
Asia.</note>
In the island of Nias people fear that the spirits of
murdered infants may come and cause women with child to
miscarry. To divert the unwelcome attention of these sprites
from a pregnant woman an elaborate mechanism has been
contrived. A potent idol called Fangola is set up beside her
bed to guard her slumbers during the hours of darkness from
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
the evil things that might harm her; another idol, connected
with the first by a chain of palm-leaves, is erected in the large
room of the house; and lastly a small banana-tree is planted
in front of the second idol. The notion is that the sprites,
scared away by the watchful Fangola from the sleeping
woman, will scramble along the chain of palm-leaves to the
other idol, and then, beholding the banana-tree, will mistake
it for the woman they were looking for, and so pounce upon
it instead of her.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kramer, <q>Der Götzendienst
der Niasser,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiii.
(1890) p. 489.</note> In Bhutan, when the Lamas make noisy
music to drive away the demon who is causing disease, little
models of animals are fashioned of flour and butter and the
evil spirit is implored to enter these models, which are then
burnt.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völkerstämme am
Brahmaputra</hi> (Berlin, 1883), p. 73.</note> So in Tibet, when a man is very ill and all other
remedies have failed, his friends will sometimes, as a last
resort, offer an image of him with some of his clothes to
the Lord of Death, beseeching that august personage to
accept the image and spare the man.<note place='foot'>Sarat Chandra Das, <hi rend='italic'>Journey to
Lhasa and Central Tibet</hi> (London,
1902), p. 134.</note> A Burmese mode
of curing a sick man is to bury a small effigy of him in a
tiny coffin, after which he ought certainly to recover.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi> (London,
1882), ii. 138.</note> In
Siam, when a person is dangerously ill, the magician
models a small image of him in clay and carrying it
away to a solitary place recites charms over it which
compel the malady to pass from the sick man into the
image. The sorcerer then buries the image, and the sufferer
is made whole.<note place='foot'>Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Description du Royaume
Thai ou Siam</hi> (Paris, 1854), ii. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des
östlichen Asien</hi> (Leipsic and Jena,
1866-1871), iii. 293, 486; E. Young,
<hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</hi>
(Westminster, 1898), p. 121.</note> So, too, in Cambodia the doctor fashions
a rude effigy of his patient in clay and deposits it in some
lonely spot, where the ghost or demon takes it instead of the
man.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>
(Paris, 1883), i. 176.</note> The same ideas and the same practices prevail much
further to the north among the tribes on the lower course of
the River Amoor. When a Goldi or a Gilyak shaman has
cast out the devil that caused disease, an abode has to be
provided for the homeless devil, and this is done by making
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
a wooden idol in human form of which the ejected demon
takes possession.<note place='foot'>A. Woldt, <q>Die Kultus-Gegenstände
der Golden und Giljaken,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
i. (1888) pp. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigies
used to
divert
ghostly
and other
evil influence
from
people in
China.</note>
The Chinese of Amoy make great use of cheap effigies
as means of diverting ghostly and other evil influence
from people. These effigies are kept in stock and sold
in the shops which purvey counterfeit paper money and
other spurious wares for the use of simple-minded ghosts
and gods, who accept them in all good faith instead of the
genuine articles. Nothing could well be cruder than the
puppets that are employed to relieve sufferers from the many
ills which flesh is heir to. They are composed of two bamboo
splinters fastened together crosswise with a piece of paper
pasted on one side to represent a human body. Two other
shreds of paper, supposed to stand for boots, distinguish the
effigy of a man from the effigy of a woman. Armed with
one of these <q>substitutes for a person,</q> as they are called,
you may set fortune at defiance. If a member of your
family, for example, is ailing, or has suffered any evil whatever,
or even is merely threatened by misfortune, all that
you have to do is to send for one of these puppets, pass
it all over his body while you recite an appropriate spell,
and then burn the puppet. The maleficent influence is thus
elicited from the person of the sufferer and destroyed once
for all. If your child has tumbled into one of those open
sewers which yawn for the unwary in the streets, you
need only fish him out, pass the puppet over his filthy
little body, and say: <q>This contact (of the substitute) with
the front of the body brings purity and prosperity, and the
contact with the back gives power to eat till an old, old, old
age; the contact with the left side establishes well-being
for years and years, and the contact with the right side
bestows longevity; happy fate, come! ill fate, be transferred
to the substitute!</q> So saying you burn the
substitute, by choice near the unsavoury spot where the
accident happened; and if you are a careful man you will
fetch a pail of water and wash the ashes away. Moreover,
the child's head should be shaven quite clean; but if the
sufferer was an adult, it is enough to lay bare with the razor
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
a small patch on his scalp to let out the evil influence.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, vi. (Leyden, 1910)
pp. 1103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; for a description of the
effigies or <q>substitutes for a person</q>
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, vol. v. (Leyden, 1907) p.
920. Can the monkish and clerical
tonsure have been originally designed
in like manner to let out the evil
influence through the top of the head?</note> In
Corea effigies are employed on much the same principle for
the purpose of prolonging life. On the fourteenth and the
fifteenth day of the first month all men and women born under
the Jen or <q>Man</q> star make certain straw images dressed
in clothes and containing a number of the copper cash which
form the currency of the country. Strictly speaking, there
should be as many cash in the image as the person whom
it represents has lived years; but the rule is not strictly
observed. These images are placed on the path outside
the house, and the poor people seize them and tear them
up in order to get the cash which they contain. The
destruction of the image is supposed to save the person
represented from death for ten years. Accordingly the
ceremony need only be performed once in ten years,
though some people from excess of caution appear to
observe it annually.<note place='foot'>T. Watters, <q>Some Corean
Customs and Notions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi.
(1895) pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigies
used as
substitutes
to save the
lives of
people
among the
Abchases
of the Caucasus
and
the Ewe
negroes of
West
Africa.</note>
The Abchases of the Caucasus believe that sickness
is sometimes caused by Mother Earth. So in order to
appease her and redeem the life of the sick man, an
innocent maiden will make a puppet in human form,
richly clad, and bury it in the earth, saying, <q>Instead of the
sick man, play and delight yourself with this.</q><note place='foot'>N. v. Seidlitz, <q>Die Abchasen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxvi. (1894) p. 54.</note> The Ewe
negroes of Togoland, in West Africa, think that the spirits of
all living people come from heaven, where they live in the
intervals between their incarnations. Life in Amedzowe, as
they call that heavenly region, which lies a little to the east
of the town of Ho, is very like life on earth. There are
fields there and wildernesses and forests. Also there are
all kinds of food, such as yams and maize and likewise stock-yams,
not to speak of cotton; in fact, all these things came
from heaven just as men themselves did. Moreover, everybody
has his spiritual mother in heaven and his spiritual
aunt, also his spiritual uncle, his spiritual grandfather, and
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
so on, just as on earth. Now the spirits in heaven are
apt to resent it when one of their number quits them to
go and be born as a child on earth; and sometimes they
will pursue the truant and carry him back to the celestial
country, and that is what we call death. Little children are
most commonly fetched away by their mother in heaven;
for she wearies for them and comes and lays an invisible
hand on the child, and it sickens and dies. If you hear a
child whimpering of nights, you may be sure that its mother
from heaven has laid her hand on it and is drawing it away
to herself. If the child grows very sick and its earthly
mother fears that it will die, she will mould two figures of
clay, a man and a woman, and offer them in exchange to
the heavenly mother, saying, <q>O thou bearer and mother of
children! instead of the child that has gone away from thee
we bring thee here in exchange these clay men. Take them
and withdraw thy hand from the child in this visible world.</q>
Grown-up people also, when they fall sick, will sometimes
make images of clay and offer them as substitutes to the
messengers who have come from heaven to fetch them away.
These images are deposited with other offerings, such as
cowry-shells and a musket, by the roadside; and if the
messengers accept them instead of the sick man, he recovers.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 502-506, 512, 513,
838, 848, 910. It is a disputed point
in Ewe theology whether there are
many spiritual mothers in heaven or
only one. Some say that there are as
many spiritual mothers as there are
individual men and women; others
doubt this and say that there is only
one spiritual mother, and that she is
the wife of God (<foreign rend='italic'>Mawu</foreign>) and gave
birth to all spirits that live in heaven,
both men and women.</note>
During an epidemic of small-pox the Ewe negroes
will sometimes clear a space outside of the town, where
they erect a number of low mounds and cover them with as
many little clay figures as there are people in the place.
Pots of food and water are also set out for the refreshment
of the spirit of small-pox who, it is hoped, will take the clay
figures and spare the living folk; and to make assurance
doubly sure the road into the town is barricaded against
him.<note place='foot'>G. Binetsch, <q>Beantwortung
mehrerer Fragen über unser Ewe-Volk
und seine Anschauungen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xxxviii. (1906) p. 37.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigies
used as
substitutes
to save the
lives of
people
among the
Nishga
Indians.</note>
Among the Nishga Indians of British Columbia when
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
a medicine-man dreams a dream which portends death to
somebody, he informs the person whose life is threatened, and
together they concert measures to avert the evil omen. The
man whose life is at stake has a small wooden figure called
a <foreign rend='italic'>shigigiadsqu</foreign> made as like himself as the skill of the wood-carver
will allow, and this he hangs round his neck by a string
so that the figure lies exactly over his heart. In this position
he wears it long enough to allow the heat of his body to be
imparted to it, generally for about four days. On the fourth
day the medicine-man comes to the house, arrayed in his
bearskin and other insignia of office and bringing with him
a wisp of teased bark and a toy canoe made of cedar-bark.
Thus equipped, he sings a doleful ditty, the death-song of
the tribe. Then he washes the man over the region of the
heart with the wisp of bark dipped in water, places the wisp,
together with the wooden image, in the canoe, and after again
singing the death-chant, commits image, wisp, and canoe to
the flames, where they are all consumed. The death-chant
is now changed to a song of joy, and the man who was
lately in fear of his life joins in. He may well be gay, for
has he not given death the slip by devoting to destruction,
not merely a wisp saturated with the dangerous defilement
of his body, but also a substitute made in his own likeness
and impregnated with his very heart's warmth?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Illustrated Missionary News</hi>,
April 1st, 1891, pp. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
woollen
effigies
hung out at
the Compitalia
in
Rome were
probably
offered as
substitutes
for living
persons to
the Mother
or Grandmother
of
Ghosts.</note>
With these examples before us we may fairly conclude
that the woollen effigies, which at the festival of the
Compitalia might be seen hanging at the doors of all the
houses in ancient Rome, were not substitutes for human
victims who had formerly been sacrificed at this season, but
rather vicarious offerings presented to the Mother or Grandmother
of Ghosts, in the hope that on her rounds through
the city she would accept or mistake the effigies for the
inmates of the house and so spare the living for another
year. It is possible that the puppets made of rushes, which
in the month of May the pontiffs and Vestal Virgins annually
threw into the Tiber from the old Sublician bridge at Rome,<note place='foot'>As to the custom see Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De
lingua latina</hi>, v. 45; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, v.
621 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis,
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquit. Roman.</hi> i. 38; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Romanae</hi>, 32 and 86.
For various explanations which have
been proposed, see L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> ii. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>,
pp. 265 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Philology</hi>,
xiv. (1885) p. 156 note; R. von
Ihering, <hi rend='italic'>Vorgeschichte der Indoeuropäer</hi>,
pp. 430-434; W. Warde Fowler,
<hi rend='italic'>The Roman Festivals of the Period of
the Republic</hi> (London, 1899), pp. 111
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious Experience of
the Roman People</hi> (London, 1911), pp.
54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 321 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Wissowa, <hi rend='italic'>Gesammelte
Abhandlungen zur römischen
Religions- und Stadtgeschichte</hi> (Munich,
1904), pp. 211-229. The ceremony
was observed on the fifteenth
of May.</note>
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
had originally the same significance; that is, they may have
been designed to purge the city from demoniac influence by
diverting the attention of the demons from human beings to
the puppets and then toppling the whole uncanny crew, neck
and crop, into the river, which would soon sweep them far out
to sea. In precisely the same way the natives of Old Calabar
used periodically to rid their town of the devils which
infested it by luring the unwary demons into a number of
lamentable scarecrows, which they afterwards flung into the
river.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>, Second
Edition, iii. 107.</note> This interpretation of the Roman custom is supported
to some extent by the evidence of Plutarch, who speaks of
the ceremony as <q>the greatest of purifications.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Roman.</hi> 86.</note> However,
other explanations of the rite have been proposed: indeed
these puppets of rushes have been a standing puzzle to
Roman antiquaries in ancient and modern times.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. The Sacrifice of First-Fruits.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sacrifice
of first-fruits
to
gods is
probably
later than
the custom
of partaking
of
them
sacramentally.
First-fruits
sometimes
presented
to the king
and often
to the dead.</note>
In the preceding chapter we saw that primitive peoples
often partake of the new corn and the new fruits sacramentally,
because they suppose them to be instinct with a divine
spirit or life. At a later age, when the fruits of the earth
are conceived as created rather than as animated by a
divinity, the new fruits are no longer partaken of sacramentally
as the body and blood of a god; but a portion of them
is offered to the divine beings who are believed to have produced
them. Originally, perhaps, offerings of first-fruits were
supposed to be necessary for the subsistence of the divinities,
who without them must have died of hunger;<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> but in after
times they seem to be looked on rather in the light of a tribute
or mark of homage rendered by man to the gods for the good
gifts they have bestowed on him. Sometimes the first-fruits
are presented to the king, perhaps in his character of a god;
very often they are made over to the spirits of the human
dead, who are sometimes thought to have it in their power
to give or withhold the crops. Till the first-fruits have been
offered to the deity, the dead, or the king, people are not
at liberty to eat of the new crops. But, as it is not always
possible to draw a sharp line between the sacrament and the
sacrifice of first-fruits, it may be well to round off this part
of the subject by giving some examples of the latter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifice of
first-fruits
among the
Ovambo
of South-West
Africa.</note>
The Ovambo or Ovakuanjama of South-West Africa
stand in great fear of the spirits of the dead, who are
believed to exercise a powerful influence over the living;
in particular the spirits of dead chiefs can give or withhold
rain, a matter of vital importance in the parched region of
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
Ovamboland. Accordingly the people pay great respect to
the spirits of the departed, and they hold a thanksgiving
festival in their honour at the close of the harvest. When
the new corn has been reaped and ground, a portion of it
is made into porridge and carried to the quarters of the
principal wife. Here all the inhabitants of the kraal
assemble; the head of the family takes some of the porridge,
dips it in melted fat, and throws it to the east, saying, <q>Take
it, ye spirits of the East!</q> Then he does the same towards
the west, saying, <q>Take it, ye spirits of the West!</q> This
is regarded as a thank-offering presented to the spirits of the
dead for not visiting the people with sickness while they were
cultivating the fields, and especially for sending the rain.<note place='foot'>H. Tönjes, <hi rend='italic'>Ovamboland, Land,
Leute, Mission</hi> (Berlin, 1911), p. 195.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
South
Africa.</note>
Among the Basutos, when the corn has been threshed
and winnowed, it is left in a heap on the threshing-floor.
Before it can be touched a religious ceremony must be performed.
The persons to whom the corn belongs bring a
new vessel to the spot, in which they boil some of the grain.
When it is boiled they throw a few handfuls of it on the heap
of corn, saying, <q>Thank you, gods; give us bread to-morrow
also!</q> When this is done the rest is eaten, and the provision
for the year is considered pure and fit to eat.<note place='foot'>Rev E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi> (London,
1861), pp. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here
the sacrifice of the first-fruits to the gods is the prominent
idea, which comes out again in the custom of leaving in the
threshing-floor a little hollow filled with grain, as a thank-offering
to these powerful beings.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 252.</note> Still the Basutos retain
a lively sense of the sanctity of the corn in itself; for, so long
as it is exposed to view, all defiled persons are carefully kept
from it. If it is necessary to employ a defiled person in
carrying home the harvest, he remains at some distance
while the sacks are being filled, and only approaches to
place them upon the draught oxen. As soon as the load is
deposited at the dwelling he retires, and under no pretext
may he help to pour the corn into the baskets in which it
is kept.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the southern
province of Ceylon <q>the threshers behave
as if they were in a temple of the
gods when they put the corn into the
bags.</q> See C. J. R. Le Mesurier,
<q>Customs and Superstitions connected
with the Cultivation of Rice in the
Southern Province of Ceylon,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, N.S. xvii.
(1885), p. 371.</note> The Makalaka worship a god called Shumpaoli,
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
whose image is to be found in the enclosure outside of their
huts. The image consists of the head of an axe, a stone
from the river, and a twig or long stalk of grass planted
between them in the ground. About this god they scatter
the first-fruits of their harvest, and when they brew beer they
pour some of it on him.<note place='foot'>L. Decle, <hi rend='italic'>Three Years in Savage
Africa</hi> (London, 1898), p. 173.</note> Of the Bantu tribes of South
Africa in general we are told that they might not eat of
the new crops till the chief gave them leave to do so.
When the millet was ripe he appointed a general assembly
of the people at his residence, which was known as the
Great Place; he then performed certain rites, and in particular
he offered a small quantity of the fresh grain to the
spirits of his ancestors, either by laying it on their graves or
by casting it into a stream. After that he granted the
people permission to gather and eat the new corn.<note place='foot'>G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Records of South-Eastern
Africa</hi>, vii. (1901) p. 397.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
Central
Africa.</note>
Among the Maraves or Zimbas, a tribe of the Upper Zambesi,
bordering on the Portuguese territory, it is the custom
that first-fruits of all produce must be offered to the spirits of
the dead (<foreign rend='italic'>muzimos</foreign>), to whom they attribute all the good and
ill that befall them. Every year at harvest-time the offerings
are brought to these mighty beings. Small portions
of all kinds of fruits, together with cooked fowls and <foreign rend='italic'>pombe</foreign>
(the native intoxicant), are carried in procession, with songs,
dances, and the beating of drums, to the burial-ground, which
is always situated in a grove or a wilderness and is esteemed
a sacred place; no tree may be felled and no animal killed
on the holy ground, for the natives believe that a spirit of
the dead is present in everything within the precincts.<note place='foot'><q>Der Muata Cazembe und die
Völkerstämme der Maravis, Chevas,
Muembas, Lundas und andere von Süd-Afrika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkünde</hi>
(Berlin), vi. (1856) pp. 272, 273.</note>
Among the Yaos of British Central Africa <q>offerings are
made to the spirit world or to <foreign rend='italic'>mulungu</foreign> as the great agency
in the affairs of human life. Outside the village, or beside
the head-man's hut, may often be seen a rough shed. In
this are placed the first-fruits of the new crop, green maize,
beans, pumpkins, peas, etc., as a thank offering from the
villagers for their harvest. This is described as <foreign rend='italic'>kulomba
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
mulungu</foreign>, to worship <foreign rend='italic'>mulungu</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. A. Hetherwick, <q>Some
Animistic Beliefs among the Yaos of
British Central Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> By <foreign rend='italic'>mulungu</foreign> the Yaos
mean primarily and strictly the soul of a dead person, which
is believed to influence the lives and fortunes of the
survivors, and therefore needs to be honoured and propitiated;
but they employ the word in an extended sense to
signify the aggregate of the spirits of all the dead, and
missionaries have adopted it as the nearest equivalent for the
word God.<note place='foot'>Rev. A. Hetherwick, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
91-94.</note> Among the Winamwanga, a tribe of north-eastern
Rhodesia, between Lake Nyassa and Lake Tanganyika, it
is customary to offer the first beer and the first flour made
from the new harvest of millet to the spirits of the dead. The
head of the family pours out some beer and a small quantity
of the new flour in a heap on the floor of his own house, after
which he prays to the spirits of his forefathers, thanks them
for the harvest, and invites them to come and partake of it
with the family. The priest performs the same ceremony
at the shrine for the whole village. The householder or the
priest speaks to the spirits as if they were sitting around
him. Thus he may say, <q>O ye great spirits, fathers in the
spirit world, mothers in the spirit world, and all ye others,
bless us now. Here is the food, and here is the offering, call
ye all of you each other.</q> Then after summoning the
dead by their names he may go on: <q>Come all of you and
partake of this offering. Ye great spirits, all things of this
earth were known to you while yet ye were here. Take
care of this your family, and of all these your children.
May we ever go in our ways in prosperity. Oh! ye great
spirits, give to us food and all the produce of the land.
Drive ye away all illnesses from your family, ye great
spirits; every evil spirit put far away from us, and whatever
might seek to hurt us may it fly away on the wind.
Cause ye us to abide in peace.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. J. A. Chisholm, <q>Notes on
the Manners and Customs of the Winamwanga
and Wiwa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
African Society</hi>, vol. ix. No. 36 (July
1910), pp. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among the Winamwanga,
as among the Yaos, the human
soul or spirit is called <foreign rend='italic'>muzimu</foreign> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 363).</note> Among the Yombe of
Northern Rhodesia, to the west of Lake Tanganyika, no one
is allowed to partake of the new fruits until certain ceremonies
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
have been performed. Escorted by a band of
drummers, his medicine-men, and the village elders, the
chief ascends the Kalanga Mountain until he reaches the
hollow fastness which in former days his forefathers held
against the marauding Angoni. Here the grandfather of
the present chief lies buried. Before his tomb a bull is
slain, and pots of freshly-brewed beer and porridge made
from the first-fruits are deposited before the shrine. The
ground is then carefully cleaned of weeds, and the blood of
the bull is sprinkled on the freshly-turned-up soil and on
the rafters of the little hut. After offering the customary
prayers in thanksgiving for the harvest, and beseeching the
spirits to partake with them of the first-fruits, the procession
retires. On their return to the village, the carcase of the bull
is divided, all partake of the fresh porridge and beer awaiting
them, and the day closes with beer-drinking and dancing.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, <hi rend='italic'>The
Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
East Africa.</note>
The A-Kamba of British East Africa offer first-fruits
to the spirits of their dead before anybody may eat of
the new crop. Sometimes these offerings are piled on
the graves of chiefs and left there along with the meat of
a goat which has been sacrificed. Sometimes the offerings
are made in a cleared place under the sacred wild
fig tree (<foreign rend='italic'>mumbo</foreign>) of the village; for the A-Kamba think that
the spirits of the dead (<foreign rend='italic'>aiimu</foreign>) dwell in wild fig trees, and
they build miniature huts at the foot of the trees for the
accommodation of the ghosts. The clearing under the wild
fig tree of the village is called the Place of Prayer (<foreign rend='italic'>ithembo</foreign>).
When any crop is ripe, all the inhabitants of the district
assemble, and a very old man and woman, chosen for the
purpose, leave the crowd and go to the Place of Prayer,
where they call aloud to the spirits of the dead and ask
leave to eat the crop. The people then dance, and during
the dance one of the women is sure to be seized with a fit of
shaking and to cry aloud, which is deemed the answer of
the spirits to the people's prayer.<note place='foot'>C. W. Hobley, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of A-Kamba
and other East African Tribes</hi>
(Cambridge, 1910), pp. 66, 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Baganda
a man used to offer the first-fruits of a new garden to
his god, imploring the blessing of the deity on the future
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
crops.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 428.</note> Among the Dinka of the White Nile no member
of a family may eat the new fruits until the father
or mother has scattered some of them over the courtyard
of the house in order to ensure the blessing of
God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation de la
Foi</hi>, lx. (1888) p. 57. The account is
extracted from the letter of a Catholic
priest, himself a Dinka. The name of
God, according to him, is <foreign rend='italic'>Den-dit</foreign>,
meaning <q>Great Rain.</q> The form of
the name agrees closely, and the
interpretation of it agrees exactly, with
the results of Dr. C. G. Seligmann's
independent enquiries, according to
which the name of the Dinka God
is <foreign rend='italic'>Dengdit</foreign>, <q>Great Rain,</q> the word
for rain being <foreign rend='italic'>deng</foreign>. See Dr. C. G.
Seligmann, in Dr. J. Hastings' <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
of Religion and Ethics</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Dinka,</q> vol. iv. (Edinburgh,
1911) p. 707.</note> When the millet is ripe, the Nubas of Jebel-Nuba,
a range of mountains in the eastern Sudan, observe the
following ceremony. Every group of villages is presided
over by a sacred pontiff called a <foreign rend='italic'>cogiour</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>codjour</foreign>, who is
believed to act under the inspiration of a spirit named Laro.
So when it is known that the grain is ready to be cut, a
drum is beaten, the pontiff mounts his horse and, attended
by all the elderly men and women, repairs to his fields,
while the rest of the people betake themselves to their own
farms. There the people whose eldest child is a boy break
five ears of corn, and those whose eldest child is a girl break
four. But young unmarried people break five or four ears
according as they desire to have a boy or a girl for their
first-born. All then return to the village and place the
ears they have gathered on the hedge which serves as an
enclosure. When the beat of the drum and multitudinous
cries of joy announce the return of the pontiff, the people
take the gathered ears and advance to meet him. He rides
at the head of a cavalcade composed of all the men who
have horses. After that, attended by the elders, he retires
to his house, while the rest of the people deposit the ears of
corn in the cave of Laro, the being who inspires the holy
pontiff. Feasting, drinking, and horse-races conclude the
ceremony. At the races the young folk amuse themselves
by flinging stalks of millet before the horses to make them
shy and throw their riders.<note place='foot'><q>Coutumes étranges des indigènes
du Djebel-Nouba (Afrique centrale),
notes communiquées par les missionnaires
de Vérone,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xiv. (1882) p. 459. As to the
Nubas and their pontiff see further
Stanislas Carceri, <q>Djebel-Nouba,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>, xv. (1883)
pp. 448-452.</note>
</p>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
West
Africa.</note>
The Igbiras, a pagan tribe at the confluence of the
Niger and the Benue, bury their dead in their houses
and have great faith in the power of the ghosts, whose
guidance and protection they seek to ensure by periodical
offerings of goats and cocks. Also they offer the
first-fruits of their crops to the dead, hanging bunches of
the new grain over the burial-places in their huts. The
Igbiras also celebrate the festival of the new yams with
great pomp. It is their New Year's Day. Sacrifices of
fowls and goats are offered, and wine and oil are freely
poured out. The king takes a prominent part in the feast.<note place='foot'>A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, <hi rend='italic'>Up the
Niger</hi> (London, 1892), pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Cross River natives, in the lower valley of the
Niger, the eating of the new yams is an occasion of great
rejoicing, but no one may partake of them until a portion
has been ceremonially offered to the deities. The festival is
not held simultaneously but separately for each village according
to the state of the crops. High and low, old and young,
men, women, and children dance to music on these joyful
occasions.<note place='foot'>Ch. Partridge, <hi rend='italic'>Cross River Natives</hi>
(London, 1905), pp. 266 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Matse tribe of Ewe negroes in Togoland
worship the Earth at the times when they dig the ripe yams
in September, when they reap the ripe maize in November,
and when they burn the grass in February. The place where
they offer sacrifices to the Earth goddess is called <q>the Wood
of our Mother.</q> In the month of November the hunters, led
by the Chief Huntsman and the High Priest, repair to the
maize-fields, where they gather cobs of the ripe grain. Some
of these they deposit, with prayers, in the sacrificial place in
the wood, but they keep the finest cobs for themselves. After
this sacrifice of the new corn to the Earth goddess everybody
is free to get in his maize.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin,
1906), pp. 795 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Hos, another
Ewe tribe of Togoland, when a man is about to dig up his
yam crop, he first of all digs up two yams which he had
planted for the goddess Mawu Sodza. These he holds up to
her and prays, saying, <q>O Mawu Sodza, thou ship full of
yams, give to me, and I will give to you; pass me over, and
I will pass you over. Here are thy yams, which I have dug
for thee. When I dig mine, grant that I may have plenty.</q>
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
Thereupon he begins to dig the crop.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 344. As to
the goddess Mawu Sodza, see <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>
pp. 424 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Bassari,
another tribe of Togoland, no man may eat of the new yams
until the people have paid a tribute of the first-fruits to the
king. At such times long files of men, women, and children
may be seen wending their way to the capital to render to
the king his dues. But the king himself may not partake of
the new yams until he has offered a portion of them, along
with ten white fowls, to the fetish.<note place='foot'>H. Klose, <hi rend='italic'>Togo unter deutscher
Flagge</hi> (Berlin, 1899), p. 504.</note> Before the Adeli of the
Slave Coast may eat of the new yams, the owner of each farm
must bring the first yams of his field to the fetish priest, who
offers them to the fetish, after which he declares that the harvest
may take place. The festival, accompanied by shooting
and dancing, lasts several days; it generally falls in August.<note place='foot'>L. Conradt, <q>Das Hinterland der
deutschen Kolonie Togo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mittheilungen</hi>, xlii. (1896) p. 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>First-fruits
offered to
kings in
Madagascar
and
Burma.</note>
Among the Betsileo of Madagascar the king used to
receive first-fruits of all the crops, such as rice, maize,
manioc, beans, and sweet potatoes: indeed this tribute of
first-fruits formed a large part of his revenue.<note place='foot'>G. A. Shaw, <q>The Betsileo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar
Magazine, Reprint of the First Four
Numbers</hi> (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 346.</note> The Hovas
of Madagascar present the first sheaves of the new grain to
the sovereign. The sheaves are carried in procession to the
palace from time to time as the grain ripens.<note place='foot'>J. Cameron, <q>On the Early Inhabitants
of Madagascar,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magazine,
Reprint of the First Four Numbers</hi>
(Antananarivo, 1885), p. 263.</note> So in Burma,
when the <foreign rend='italic'>pangati</foreign> fruits ripen, some of them used to be taken
to the king's palace that he might eat of them; no one
might partake of them before the king.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. (Leipsic, 1866), p. 105.</note> It has been
suggested that the modern system of taxation may be
directly derived from the ancient obligation of paying first-fruits
to a sacred pontiff or king.<note place='foot'>A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et Totémisme
à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), p. 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
Assam and
other parts
of India. Sacrifices
of first-fruits
among hill
tribes of
India.
Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in the
Central
Provinces
of India. Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in the
Punjaub.</note>
Every year, when they gather their first crops, the Kochs
of Assam offer some of the first-fruits to their ancestors,
calling to them by name and clapping their hands.<note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi> (Calcutta, 1872), p.
91.</note> Before
they harvest any of their crops, the Garos, another people of
Assam, deem it necessary to sacrifice the first-fruits of the
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
crops to the gods. Thus, for example, they gather some ears
of rice or millet, pound them between two stones, and offer
them up on a piece of plantain stem.<note place='foot'>Major A. Playfair, <hi rend='italic'>The Garos</hi>
(London, 1909), p. 94.</note> In August, when the
rice ripens, the Hos of Bengal offer the first-fruits of the
harvest to Sing Bonga, who dwells in the sun. Along with
the new rice a white cock is sacrificed; and till the sacrifice
has been offered no one may eat the new rice.<note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 198; (Sir)
H. H. Risley, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes and Castes of
Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary</hi> (Calcutta,
1891-1892), ii. 104.</note> Among the
Oraons of Bengal no one will partake of the new rice until
some of it has been offered to the ancestors. A handful of it
is cooked and spread on the ground, and a pot of rice-beer is
brewed and some of the beer also spilt on the ground. Before
drinking every one dips his finger in his cup and lets fall some
drops in honour of the ancestors. Further, a whity grey fowl
is killed, and the eldest of the family, addressing the ancestral
spirits, says, <q>O old mothers and fathers, you have always
been so good to us on these days. Here we are rejoicing: we
cannot forget you: come and rejoice with us.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., <hi rend='italic'>Religion and
Customs of the Uraons</hi> (Calcutta, 1906),
p. 137 (<hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal</hi>, vol. i. No. 9).</note> In Ladakh
the peasants offer the first two or three handfuls of the wheat-crop
to the spirit who presides over agriculture. These
offerings they attach to the tops of the pillars which support
the roofs of their houses; and thus the bands of straw and
ears of wheat form a primitive sort of capital. Rams' horns
are sometimes added to this decoration.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes and Queries</hi>,
i. 57, No. 428, quoting Moorcroft and
Trebeck, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Himalayan
Provinces</hi>, i. 317 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Himalayan
districts of the North-Western provinces of India the fields
and boundaries are under the protection of a beneficent
local deity named Kshetrpal or Bhumiya. Every village
possesses a small temple sacred to him. When a crop is
sown, a handful of grain is sprinkled over a stone in the
corner of the field nearest to the temple, in order that the
god may protect the growing crop from hail, blight, and the
ravages of wild beasts; and at harvest he receives the first-fruits
in order that he may save the garnered grain from
the inroads of rats and insects.<note place='foot'>E. T. Atkinson, <hi rend='italic'>The Himalayan
Districts of the North-Western Provinces
of India</hi>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884)
p. 825. As to Bhumiya see further
W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 105-107, who observes
(pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>): <q>To illustrate
the close connection between this
worship of Bhûmiya as the soil godling
with that of the sainted dead, it may
be noted that in some places the shrine
of Bhûmiya is identified with the
Jathera, which is the ancestral mound,
sacred to the common ancestor of the
village or tribe.</q></note> Among the hill tribes near
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
Rajamahall, in India, when the <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign> grain is being
reaped in November or early in December, a festival is held
as a thanksgiving before the new grain is eaten. On a day
appointed by the chief a goat is sacrificed by two men to a
god called Chitariah Gossaih, after which the chief himself
sacrifices a fowl. Then the vassals repair to their fields, offer
thanksgiving, make an oblation to Kull Gossaih (who is
described as the Ceres of these mountaineers), and then
return to their houses to eat of the new <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign>. As soon as
the inhabitants have assembled at the chief's house&mdash;the men
sitting on one side and the women on the other&mdash;a hog, a
measure of <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign>, and a pot of spirits are presented to the
chief, who in return blesses his vassals, and exhorts them to
industry and good behaviour; <q>after which, making a libation
in the names of all their gods, and of their dead, he drinks,
and also throws a little of the <foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign> away, repeating the
same pious exclamations.</q> Drinking and festivity then
begin, and are kept up for several days. The same tribes
have another festival at reaping the Indian corn in August
or September. Every man repairs to his fields with a hog,
a goat, or a fowl, which he sacrifices to Kull Gossaih. Then,
having feasted, he returns home, where another repast is prepared.
On this day it is customary for every family in the
village to distribute to every house a little of what they have
prepared for their feast. Should any person eat of the new
<foreign rend='italic'>kosarane</foreign> or the new Indian corn before the festival and
public thanksgiving at the reaping of these crops, the chief
fines him a white cock, which is sacrificed to Chitariah.<note place='foot'>Thomas Shaw, <q>The Inhabitants
of the Hills near Rajamahall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Asiatic
Researches</hi>, iv. (London, 1807) pp. 56
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
the Central Provinces of India the first grain of the season is
commonly offered to the god Bhímsen or Bhím Deo.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. p. 60,
§ 502 (February 1884).</note> When
the new rice crop is ripe, the Gadbas, a primitive tribe of the
Central Provinces, cook the first-fruits and serve them to the
cattle in new bamboo baskets; after that the men themselves
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
partake of the new rice.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907) p. 45.</note> The Nahals, a forest tribe of the
same region, worship the forest god Jharkhandi in the month
of Chait, and until this rite has been performed they may
not use the leaves or fruits of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Butea frondosa</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Phyllanthus
emblica</foreign>, and mango trees. When the god is worshipped,
they collect branches and leaves of these trees and offer
cooked food to them: after that they begin to use the new
leaves, fruit, and timber.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> iii. 73.</note> Again, when the Mannewars,
another forest tribe of the Central Provinces, pick the flowers
of the <foreign rend='italic'>mahua</foreign> tree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bassia latifolia</foreign>), they worship the tree and
offer it some of the liquor distilled from the new flowers,
along with a fowl and a goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> v. (Allahabad, 1911) p.
66.</note> The principal festivals of the
Parjas, a small tribe of the Central Provinces, are the feast
of new vegetation in July, the feast of the new rice in
August or September, and the feast of the new mango crop
in April or May. At these feasts the new season's crop is
eaten, and offerings of them are presented to the ancestors
of the family, who are worshipped on these occasions.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> vii. (Allahabad, 1911) p.
102.</note> In
the Punjaub, when sugar-cane is planted, a woman puts on
a necklace and walks round the field, winding thread on a
spindle;<note place='foot'>The practice is curiously unlike the
custom of ancient Italy, in most parts
of which women were forbidden by law
to walk on the highroads twirling a
spindle, because this was supposed to
injure the crops (Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xxviii. 28). The purpose of the Indian
custom may be to ward off evil influences
from the field, as Mr. W.
Crooke suggests (<hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi>, ii. 305,
<q>This forms a sacred circle which
repels evil influence from the crop</q>).
Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and when the sugar-cane is cut the first-fruits are
offered on an altar, which is built close to the press and is
sacred to the sugar-cane god. Afterwards the first-fruits are
given to Brahmans. Also, when the women begin to pick
the cotton, they go round the field eating rice-milk, the first
mouthful of which they spit upon the field toward the west;
and the first cotton picked is exchanged at the village shop
for its weight in salt, which is prayed over and kept in the
house till the picking is finished.<note place='foot'>D. C. J. Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of
Panjab Ethnography</hi> (Calcutta, 1883),
p. 119.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
among the
ancient
Hindoos.</note>
Among the ancient Hindoos the first-fruits were sacrificed
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
to the gods at the beginning of harvest, generally at the
new or the full moon. There were two harvests in the
year; the barley was reaped in spring and the rice in
autumn. From the new grain, whether barley or rice, a
sacrificial cake was prepared and set forth on twelve
potsherds for the two great gods Indra and Agni; a pap
or gruel of boiled grain, sodden either in water or milk, was
offered to the Visve Devah, that is, to the common mob of
deities; and a cake on one potsherd was presented to
Heaven and Earth. The origin of these sacrifices of first-fruits
was explained by the following myth. They say that
the gods and their powerful rivals the Asuras once strove
with each other for the mastery. In this strife the Asuras
defiled, both by magic and by poison, the plants on which
men and beasts subsist; for thus they hoped to get the better
of the gods. Therefore neither man nor beast could eat
food, and for lack of it they well nigh perished. When the
gods heard of it, they said one to the other, <q>Come let
us rid the plants of the defilement,</q> and they did so by
means of the sacrifice. But they could not agree as to
which of them should receive the sacrifices, so to decide this
delicate question they ran a race, and Indra and Agni came
in first; that is why the cake is offered to them on twelve
potsherds, while the common mob of the gods have to put up
with a simple pap or gruel. To this day, therefore, he who
offers the first-fruits to the gods does it either because no
one will then be able to defile the plants, neither by magic
nor yet by poison; or perhaps he does it because the gods
did so before him. Be that as it may, certain it is that
he thereby renders both kinds of plants wholesome and
innocuous, both the plants which men eat and the plants
on which cattle graze; that indeed is the reason why the
sacrificer sacrifices the first-fruits. And the priest's fee for
the sacrifice is the first-born calf of the season, which is, as
it were, the first-fruit of the cattle.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Satapatha Brâhmana</hi>, translated
by Julius Eggeling, Part i.
(Oxford, 1882), pp. 369-373 (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, vol. xii.).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
Burma and
Corea.</note>
The Kachins of Upper Burma worship the spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>nat</foreign>)
of the earth every year before they sow their crops. The
worship is performed by the chief on behalf of all the
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
villagers, who contribute their offerings. The priest afterwards
determines by exorcism which particular household
shall start sowing first in order that the crop may be a good
one. Then the household on which the lot has fallen goes
out and sows its fields. When the crop is ripe, it may not
be reaped until the household which was the first to sow its
fields has gathered the first-fruits and offered them to its
own domestic spirits (<foreign rend='italic'>nats</foreign>). This is usually done before the
crop is quite ripe, in order that the reaping of the other
crops may not be delayed.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman,
<hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and
the Shan States</hi>, Part i. vol. i. (Rangoon,
1900), pp. 425 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Chins, another people of
Upper Burma, eat the first-fruits of their corn as a religious
rite, but before doing so they offer some of the new corn or
vegetables to their dead ancestors. They also offer the first-fruits
to the goddess Pok Klai, a single glance of whose
eyes is enough to give them a plentiful harvest of rice.<note place='foot'>Rev. G. Whitehead, <q>Notes on
the Chins of Burma,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>,
xxxvi. (1907) p. 207.</note>
Among the Thay of Indo-China the first-fruits of the
rice are offered at harvest to the guardian spirit of the
family before the household may partake of the new crop.
The guardian spirit of the family is the last ancestor who
died; he mounts guard until he is relieved by his successor;
his shrine is a corner of the house screened off by a low
trellis of bamboo. But besides the first-fruits offered him
at harvest this guardian spirit receives some of the parched
grain in spring, at the time when the first thunder of the
season is heard to mutter. The grain which is presented
to him on this occasion was plucked from the crop before
the rice was quite ripe, and it has been carefully kept to
be offered to him when the first peal of thunder in spring
announces the reviving energies of nature. When all is
ready, the rice is served up together with fish, which have
been caught for the purpose, on a table set in the corner
which is sacred to the guardian spirit. A priest drones out
a long invitation to the spirit to come and feast with his
children; then the family sits down to table and consumes
the offerings. At the close of the banquet the daughter-in-law
of the deceased ancestor hangs up a basket containing
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
rice and fish for his use in the corner, after which she closes
the shrine for another year.<note place='foot'>A. Bourlet, <q>Les Thay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>,
ii. (1907) pp. 627-629.</note> In Corea the first-fruits of all
the crops used to be offered to the king with religious
pomp, and he received almost divine honours from his
subjects.<note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Eglise
de Corée</hi> (Paris, 1874), i. p. xxiv.</note> This suggests that, as I have already conjectured,
the common practice, of presenting the first-fruits
to kings is founded on a belief in their divinity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
the East
Indies.</note>
In the island of Tjumba, East Indies, a festival is held
after harvest. Vessels filled with rice are presented as a
thankoffering to the gods. Then the sacred stone at the
foot of a palm-tree is sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed
animal; and rice, with some of the flesh, is laid on the
stone for the gods. The palm-tree is hung with lances and
shields.<note place='foot'>Fr. Junghuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Battaländer
auf Sumatra</hi> (Berlin, 1847), ii. 312.</note> The Dyaks of Borneo hold a feast of first-fruits
when the paddy or unhusked rice is ripe. The priestesses,
accompanied by a gong and drum, go in procession to the
farms and gather several bunches of the ripe paddy. These
are brought back to the village, washed in coco-nut water, and
laid round a bamboo altar, which at the harvest festivals is
erected in the common room of the largest house. The
altar is gaily decorated with white and red streamers, and is
hung with the sweet-smelling blossom of the areca palm.
The feast lasts two days, during which the village is tabooed;
no one may leave it. Only fowls are killed, and dancing
and gong-beating go on day and night. When the festival
is over the people are free to get in their crops.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1863), i. 191.</note> The
pounding of the new paddy is the occasion of a harvest
festival which is celebrated all over Celebes. The religious
ceremonies which accompany the feast were witnessed by
Dr. B. F. Matthes in July 1857. Two mats were spread on
the ground, each with a pillow on it. On one of the pillows
were placed a man's clothes and a sword, on the other a
woman's clothes. These were seemingly intended to represent
the deceased ancestors. Rice and water were deposited
before the two dummy figures, which were also sprinkled
with the new paddy. Moreover, dishes of rice were set
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
down for the rest of the family and the slaves of the
deceased. This was the end of the ceremony.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Beknopt Verslag
mijner reizen in de Binnenlanden van
Celebes, in de jaren 1857 en 1861</hi>, p. 5
(<hi rend='italic'>Verzameling van Berigten betreffende
de Bijbelverspreiding</hi>, Nos. 96-99).</note> In Minahassa,
a district of Celebes, the people have a festival of
<q>eating the new rice.</q> Fowls or pigs are killed; some
of the flesh, with rice and palm-wine, is set apart for the
gods, and then the eating and drinking begin.<note place='foot'>N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi> (Rotterdam,
1869), i. 165.</note> The
people of Kobi and Sariputi, two villages on the north-east
coast of Ceram, offer the first-fruits of the paddy,
in the form of cooked rice, with tobacco and other things,
to their ancestors as a token of gratitude. The ceremony
is called <q>feeding the dead.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), p. 107.</note> In the Tenimber
and Timor-laut Islands, East Indies, the first-fruits of the
paddy, along with live fowls and pigs, are offered to the
<foreign rend='italic'>matmate</foreign>. The <foreign rend='italic'>matmate</foreign> are the spirits of their ancestors,
which are worshipped as guardian-spirits or household gods.
They are supposed to enter the house through an opening in
the roof, and to take up their abode temporarily in their
skulls, or in images of wood or ivory, in order to partake of
the offerings and to help the family. They also assume the
form of birds, pigs, crocodiles, turtles, sharks, and so forth.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 281, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Amboyna, after the rice or other harvest has been
gathered in, some of the new fruits are offered to the gods,
and till this is done, the priests may by no means eat of
them. A portion of the new rice, or whatever it may be, is
boiled, and milk of the coco-nut is poured on it, mixed with
Indian saffron. It is then taken to the place of sacrifice and
offered to the god. Some people also pour out oil before
the deity; and if any of the oil is left over, they take
it home as a holy and priceless treasure, wherewith they
smear the forehead and breast of sick people and whole
people, in the firm conviction that the oil confers all kinds of
blessings.<note place='foot'>Fr. Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi>
(Dordrecht and Amsterdam,
1724-1726), iii. 10.</note> In the Kei Islands, to the south-west of New
Guinea, the first-fruits are offered to Lir majoran, the god of
husbandry, when the harvest is ripe.<note place='foot'>C. M. Pleyte, <q>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig
Genootschap</hi>, Tweede Serie, x.
(1893) p. 801.</note> After the rice has
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
been reaped, the people of Nias deck the images of their
ancestors with wreaths, and offer to them the first dishful
of boiled rice, while they thank them for the blessings they
have bestowed on the family.<note place='foot'>Fr. Kramer, <q>Der Götzendienst
der Niasser,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxiii.
(1890) p. 482.</note> The Irayas and Catalangans
of Luzon, tribes of the Malay stock, but of mixed blood,
worship chiefly the souls of their ancestors under the name
of <foreign rend='italic'>anitos</foreign>, to whom they offer the first-fruits of the harvest.
The <foreign rend='italic'>anitos</foreign> are household deities; some of them reside in
pots in the corners of the houses; and miniature houses,
standing near the family dwelling, are especially sacred to
them.<note place='foot'>C. Semper, <hi rend='italic'>Die Philippinen und
ihre Bewohner</hi> (Würzburg, 1869), p.
56.</note> When the Bagobos of the Philippines have got in
their harvest of rice or maize, they will neither eat of it nor
sell so much as a grain till they have made a pretence of
feeding all their agricultural implements.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Das Stromgebiet
des Rio Grande de Mindano,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mittheilungen</hi>, xxxvii. (1891)
p. 111.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
New
Guinea.</note>
The Bukaua of German New Guinea think that the
spirits of their dead have power to make the fruits of the
earth to grow. Accordingly when they have cleared a
patch in the forest for cultivation and are planting their
crops, they take particular care to plant slips near the tree-stumps
which have been left standing in the field, because
the spirits of their long dead ancestors are supposed to
perch on them. While they plant, they call out the names
of the dead, praying them to guard the field, so that their
children, the living, may have food to eat and not suffer
hunger. And similarly, when they plant stones shaped like
taro bulbs in the ground, which are supposed to produce
a fine crop of taro, they pray to their forefathers to grant
them an abundance of the fruits. When the crops are ripe,
the people fetch bundles of taro, clusters of bananas, sugar-canes,
and vegetables from the fields and bring them back
solemnly to the village; a feast is prepared and a portion
of the new fruits, along with tobacco, betel, and dog's flesh,
is put in a coco-nut shell and set on a scaffold in the house
of the owner of the field, while he prays to the spirits of
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
his forefathers, saying, <q>Ye who have guarded our field as
we asked you to do, there is something for you; now look
on us favourably also for the time to come.</q> Afterwards,
while the people are feasting, the owner privily stirs the
contents of the coco-nut shell with his finger, and then calls
the attention of the others to it as a proof that the spirits
have partaken of the offering provided for them. Finally the
food remaining in the shell is consumed by the banqueters.<note place='foot'>Stefan Lehner, <q>Bukaua,</q> in R.
Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(Berlin, 1911) pp. 434-436.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
Fiji and
the New
Hebrides.</note>
In certain tribes of Fiji <q>the first-fruits of the yam
harvest are presented to the ancestors in the Nanga [sacred
enclosure] with great ceremony before the bulk of the crop
is dug for the people's use, and no man may taste of the new
yams until the presentation has been made. The yams thus
offered are piled in the Great Nanga, and are allowed to rot
there. If any one were impiously bold enough to appropriate
them to his own use, he would be smitten with madness.
The mission teacher before mentioned told me that, when he
visited the Nanga he saw among the weeds with which
it was overgrown, numerous yam vines which had sprung up
out of the piles of decayed offerings. Great feasts are made
at the presentations of the first-fruits, which are times of public
rejoicing, and the Nanga itself is frequently spoken of as the
<foreign rend='italic'>Mbaki</foreign>, or Harvest.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <q>The Nanga,
or Sacred Stone Enclosure, of Wainimala,
Fiji,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xiv. (1885) p. 27.</note> In other parts of Fiji the practice
with regard to the first-fruits seems to have been different,
for we are told by another observer that <q>the first-fruits of
the yams, which are always presented at the principal
temple of the district, become the property of the priests,
and form their revenue, although the pretence of their being
required for the use of the god is generally kept up.</q><note place='foot'>J. E. Erskine, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
among the Islands of the Western
Pacific</hi> (London, 1853), p. 252.</note> In
Tana, one of the New Hebrides, the general name for gods
appeared to be <foreign rend='italic'>aremha</foreign>, which meant <q>a dead man.</q> The
spirits of departed ancestors were among the gods of the
people. Chiefs who reached an advanced age were deified
after their death, addressed by name, and prayed to on
various occasions. They were supposed to preside especially
over the growth of the yams and fruit-trees. The first-fruits
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
were presented to them. A little of the new fruit was laid
on a stone, or on a shelving branch of the tree, or on a rude
temporary altar, made of a few sticks lashed together with
strips of bark, in the form of a table, with its four feet stuck
in the ground. All being quiet, the chief acted as high
priest, and prayed aloud as follows: <q>Compassionate father!
here is some food for you; eat it; be kind to us on account
of it.</q> Then all the people shouted. This took place about
noon, and afterwards the assembled people feasted and danced
till midnight or morning.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi> (London, 1884),
pp. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in the
Solomon
Islands.</note>
In Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, the canarium
nut is much used in the native cookery, but formerly none
might be eaten till the sacrifice of the first-fruits had been
offered to the ghosts of the dead. This was done on behalf
of a whole village by a man who inherited a knowledge
of the way in which the sacrifice should be offered, and who
accordingly had authority to open the season. When he
saw that the time had come, he raised a shout early in the
morning, then climbed a tree, cracked the nuts, ate some
himself, and put some on the stones in his sacred place for
the particular ghost whom he worshipped. Then all the people
might gather the nuts for themselves. The chief offered
food, in which the new nuts were mixed, on the stones
of the village sanctuary; and every man who revered a
ghost of his own did the same in his private sanctuary.<note place='foot'>Rev. R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi> (Oxford, 1891), pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
This sacrifice of first-fruits was witnessed by Mr. Woodford
at the village of Aola, in the neighbouring island of Guadalcanar.
The canarium nuts, or Solomon Island almonds, had
been ripe for a week, and Mr. Woodford had expressed
a wish to taste them, but he was told that this was quite
impossible till the offering to the ghost had been made. As
a native put it, <q>Devil he eat first; all man he eat behind.</q>
All the inhabitants of the village adjourned to the sea-shore
in groups of ten or twelve to perform the sacrifice. The
party to which Mr. Woodford attached himself swept a space
clean beneath the spreading branches of a Barringtonia, and
there constructed half-a-dozen tiny altars, each about six
inches square, out of dry sticks. On these altars they laid
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
offerings of yams, taros, bananas, and a little flesh; and a
few of the nuts were skinned and set up on sticks round
about the altars. Fire was then made by the friction of
wood, for matches might not be used for this purpose,
though probably every man had a box of them in his bag.
With the sacred flame thus produced the altars were kindled
and the offerings consumed. When this was done, the
women produced large flat cakes baked of a paste of
pounded nuts, and these were eaten by all.<note place='foot'>C. M. Woodford, <hi rend='italic'>A Naturalist
among the Head-hunters, being an
Account of Three Visits to the Solomon
Islands</hi> (London, 1890), pp. 26-28.</note> In Saa,
another of the Solomon Islands, when the yams are ripe,
the people fetch some from each garden to offer to the
ghosts. Early in the morning all the male members of a
family assemble at the sanctuary of the particular ancestral
ghosts whom they revere. One of them goes with a yam
into the holy place and cries with a loud voice to the ghosts,
<q>This is yours to eat,</q> and with that he sets the yam
beside the skull which is in the sanctuary. The others call
quietly upon all the ancestors and present their yams, which
are many in number, because one from each garden is given
to each of the ghosts. Moreover, if any man has a relic of
the dead at home, such as a head, or bones, or hair, he takes
back a yam to his house and places it beside the head
or whatever it may be. In the same island, as in Florida,
the new canarium nuts may not be eaten until the first-fruits
have been offered to the ghosts. Moreover, the first flying-fish
of the season must be sacrificed to these spirits of the
dead before the living are allowed to partake of the fish.
The ghosts to whom the flying-fish are offered have the
form of sharks. Some of them have sanctuaries ashore,
where images of sharks are set up; and the flying-fish are laid
before these images. Other shark-ghosts have no place on
shore; so the fish offered to them are taken out to sea and
shredded into the water, while the names of the ghosts are
called out.<note place='foot'>Rev. R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi>, p. 138.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in the
Kingsmill
Islands.</note>
In some of the Kingsmill Islands the god most commonly
worshipped was called Tubuériki. He was represented by
a flat coral stone, of irregular shape, about three feet
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
long by eighteen inches wide, set up on end in the open air.
Leaves of the coco-nut palm were tied about it, considerably
increasing its size and height. The leaves were changed
every month, that they might be always fresh. The worship
paid to the god consisted in repeating prayers before the
stone, and laying beside it a portion of the food prepared by
the people for their own use. This they did at their daily
meals, at festivals, and whenever they specially wished
to propitiate the deity. The first-fruits of the season were
always offered to him. Every family of distinction had one
of these stones which was considered rather in the light of
a family altar than as an idol.<note place='foot'>Horatio Hale, <hi rend='italic'>United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnology and
Philology</hi> (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in the
Tonga
Islands.</note>
In the Tonga Islands the first-fruits of the year were
offered with solemn ceremony to the sacred chief Tooitonga,
who was regarded as divine. The ceremony generally took
place about October, and the people believed that if the rite
were neglected the vengeance of the gods would fall in a
signal manner upon them. The following is a description of
the festival as it was celebrated in the days when a European
flag rarely floated among the islands of the Pacific: <q rend='pre'><foreign rend='italic'>Inachi.</foreign>
This word means, literally, a share or portion of anything
that is to be or has been distributed out: but in the sense
here mentioned it means that portion of the fruits of the
earth, and other eatables, which is offered to the gods in the
person of the divine chief Tooitonga, which allotment is
made once a year, just before the yams in general are
arrived at a state of maturity; those which are used in this
ceremony being of a kind which admit of being planted
sooner than others, and, consequently, they are the first
fruits of the yam season. The object of this offering is to
insure the protection of the gods, that their favour may be
extended to the welfare of the nation generally, and in
particular to the productions of the earth, of which yams are
the most important.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The time for planting most kinds of yams is about the
latter end of July, but the species called <foreign rend='italic'>caho-caho</foreign>, which is
always used in this ceremony, is put in the ground about a
month before, when, on each plantation, there is a small
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
piece of land chosen and fenced in, for the purpose of
growing a couple of yams of the above description. As
soon as they have arrived at a state of maturity, the <foreign rend='italic'>How</foreign>
[the King] sends a messenger to Tooitonga, stating that the
yams for the <foreign rend='italic'>inachi</foreign> are fit to be taken up, and requesting
that he would appoint a day for the ceremony: he generally
fixes on the tenth day afterwards, reckoning the following
day for the first. There are no particular preparations made
till the day before the ceremony: at night, however, the
sound of the conch is heard occasionally in different parts of
the islands, and as the day of the ceremony approaches it
becomes more frequent, so that the people of almost every
plantation sound the conch three or four times, which,
breaking in upon the silence of the night, has a pleasing
effect, particularly at Vavaoo, where the number of woods
and hills send back repeated echoes, adding greatly to the
effect. The day before the ceremony, the yams are dug up,
and ornamented with a kind of ribbons prepared from the
inner membrane of the leaf of a species of pandanus, and
dyed red; when thus prepared, it is called <foreign rend='italic'>mellecoola</foreign> and is
wrapped round the yam, beginning at one end, and running
round spirally to the other, when it is brought back in the
opposite direction, the turns crossing each other in a very
neat manner. As the ceremony is always performed at the
island where Tooitonga chooses to reside, the distant islands
must make these preparations two or three days beforehand,
that the yams, etc., may be sent in time to Vavaoo, where
we will suppose the affair is to take place. The ninth day
then is employed in preparing and collecting the yams and
other provisions, such as fish, cava root, and <foreign rend='italic'>mahoa</foreign>, and
getting ready mats, <foreign rend='italic'>gnatoo</foreign>, and bundles of <foreign rend='italic'>mellecoola</foreign>: but the
yams only are to be carried in the procession about to be
described....</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The first-fruits
of
the yams
deposited
on the
grave of
the last
Tooitonga
(divine
chief).</note>
<q>The sun has scarcely set when the sound of the conch
begins again to echo through the island, increasing as the
night advances. At the Mooa [capital], and all the plantations,
the voices of men and women are heard singing
<foreign rend='italic'>Nófo óooa tegger gnaoóe, óooa gnaoóe</foreign>, <q>Rest thou, doing no
work; thou shalt not work.</q> This increases till midnight,
men generally singing the first part of the sentence, and
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
the women the last, to produce a more pleasing effect: it
then subsides for three or four hours, and again increases
as the sun rises. Nobody, however, is seen stirring out in
the public roads till about eight o'clock, when the people
from all quarters of the island are seen advancing towards
the Mooa, and canoes from all the other islands are landing
their men; so that all the inhabitants of Tonga seem
approaching by sea and land, singing and sounding the
conch. At the Mooa itself the universal bustle of preparation
is seen and heard; and the different processions entering
from various quarters, of men and women, all dressed
up in new <foreign rend='italic'>gnatoos</foreign>, ornamented with red ribbons and
wreaths of flowers, and the men armed with spears and
clubs, betoken the importance of the ceremony about to
be performed. Each party brings in its yams in a basket,
which is carried in the arms with great care, by the principal
vassal of the chief to whom the plantation may belong.
The baskets are deposited in the <foreign rend='italic'>malái</foreign><note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>malái</foreign> is <q>a piece of ground,
generally before a large house, or
chief's grave, where public ceremonies
are principally held</q> (W. Mariner,
<hi rend='italic'>Tonga Islands, Vocabulary</hi>).</note> (in the <foreign rend='italic'>Mooa</foreign>), and
some of them begin to employ themselves in slinging the
yams, each upon the centre of a pole about eight or nine
feet long, and four inches diameter. The proceedings are
regulated by attending matabooles.<note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>mataboole</foreign> is <q>a rank next
below chiefs or nobles</q> (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>).</note> The yams being all
slung, each pole is carried by two men upon their shoulders,
one walking before the other, and the yam hanging between
them, ornamented with red ribbons. The procession begins
to move towards the grave of the last Tooitonga (which is
generally in the neighbourhood, or the grave of one of
his family will do), the men advancing in a single line,
every two bearing a yam, with a slow and measured pace,
sinking at every step, as if their burden were of immense
weight. In the meantime the chiefs and matabooles are
seated in a semicircle before the grave, with their heads
bowed down, and their hands clasped before them.</q> The
procession then marched round the grave twice or thrice in
a great circle, the conchs blowing and the men singing.
Next the yams, still suspended from the poles, were deposited
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
before the grave, and their bearers sat down beside
them. One of the <foreign rend='italic'>matabooles</foreign> of Tooitonga, seating himself
before the grave, a little in advance of the men, now
addressed the gods generally, and afterwards particularly,
mentioning the late Tooitonga, and the names of several
others. He thanked them for their divine bounty in favouring
the land with the prospect of so good a harvest, and
prayed that their beneficence might be continued in future.
When he had finished, the men rose and resumed their
loads, and after parading two or three times before the
grave, marched back to the <foreign rend='italic'>malái</foreign> the same way they
came, singing and blowing the conchs as before. The
chiefs and <foreign rend='italic'>matabooles</foreign> soon followed to the same place, where
the yams had been again deposited and loosened from the
poles, though they still retained their ornaments. Here the
company sat down in a great circle, presided over by
Tooitonga, while the king and other great chiefs retired
into the background among the mass of the people. Then
the other articles that formed part of the <foreign rend='italic'>inachi</foreign> were
brought forward, consisting of dried fish, mats, etc., which,
with the yams, were divided into shares by one of the <foreign rend='italic'>matabooles</foreign>
of Tooitonga. About a fourth was allotted to the
gods, and appropriated by the priests; about a half fell
to the king; and the remainder belonged to Tooitonga.
The materials of the <foreign rend='italic'>inachi</foreign> having been carried away, the
company set themselves to drink <foreign rend='italic'>cava</foreign>. Some <foreign rend='italic'>cava</foreign> root
was brought and prepared; a large quantity of provisions,
perhaps a hundred and fifty baskets-full, was set forth, and
a small part of it was distributed to be eaten with the <foreign rend='italic'>cava</foreign>.
While the infusion was preparing, a <foreign rend='italic'>mataboole</foreign> made a
speech to the people, saying that, as they had performed
this important ceremony, the gods would protect them and
grant them long lives, if only they continued to observe the
religious rites and to pay due respect to the chiefs. When
the <foreign rend='italic'>cava</foreign> was all drunk, the circle separated, and the provisions
were shared out to each chief according to his rank.
The day concluded with wrestling, boxing, and so forth,
and then the night dances began. When these were ended,
the people went home perfectly assured of the protection of
the gods. At this ceremony, we are informed, the quantity
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
of provisions distributed was incredible, and the people
looked upon it as a very heavy tribute.<note place='foot'>W. Mariner, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the
Natives of the Tonga Islands</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1818), ii. 78, 196-203.
As to the divine chief Tooitonga
see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>,
p. 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Significance
of the
presentation
of first-fruits
to the
divine chief
at the grave
of his predecessor.</note>
In this Tongan festival the solemn presentation of the
first-fruits to the divine chief at the grave of his predecessor
is highly significant: it confirms the conclusion which we
have already reached, that wherever the first-fruits are paid
to the chief, it is rather in his religious than in his civil
capacity that he receives them. It is true that the king of
Tonga received a large share of the first-fruits, indeed a
larger share than was allotted to the divine chief; but it is
very noticeable that while the division of the first-fruits was
taking place under the presidency of the divine chief, the
king and the other great chiefs retired from the scene and
mingled with the mass of the people, as if to indicate that
as mere laymen they had no right to participate in a
religious rite of such deep solemnity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
in
Samoa and
other parts
of Polynesia.</note>
The Samoans used to present the first-fruits to the
spirits (<foreign rend='italic'>aitus</foreign>) and chiefs.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes,. <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition</hi>,
New Edition (New York, 1851), ii.
133.</note> For example, a family whose
god was in the form of an eel presented the first-fruits of
their taro plantations to the eel.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Tahiti <q>the first fish
taken periodically on their shores, together with a number
of kinds regarded as sacred, were conveyed to the altar.
The first-fruits of their orchards and gardens were also
<foreign rend='italic'>taumaha</foreign>, or offered, with a portion of their live stock, which
consisted of pigs, dogs, and fowls, as it was supposed death
would be inflicted on the owner or the occupant of the land,
from which the god should not receive such acknowledgment.</q><note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836),
i. 350.</note>
In Huahine, one of the Society Islands, the
first-fruits were presented to the god Tani. A poor person
was expected to bring two of the earliest fruits gathered, of
whatever kind; a <foreign rend='italic'>raatira</foreign> had to bring ten, and chiefs and
princes had to bring more, according to their rank and
riches. They carried the fruits to the temple, where they
threw them down on the ground, with the words, <q>Here,
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
Tani, I have brought you something to eat.</q><note place='foot'>D. Tyerman and G. Bennet,
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of Voyages and Travels</hi> (London,
1831), i. 284.</note> The chief
gods of the Easter Islanders were Make-Make and Haua.
To these they offered the first of all the produce of the
ground.<note place='foot'>Geiseler, <hi rend='italic'>Die Oster-Insel</hi> (Berlin,
1883), p. 31.</note> Amongst the Maoris the offering of the first-fruits
of the sweet potatoes to Pani, son of Rongo, the god of
sweet potatoes, was a solemn religious ceremony. The crop
of sweet potatoes (<foreign rend='italic'>kumara</foreign>) was sacred, and all persons
engaged in its cultivation were also sacred or tabooed;
they might not quit the place nor undertake any other work.<note place='foot'>E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of New
Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xix. (1890) p. 110; R.
Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand
and its Inhabitants</hi>, Second Edition
(London, 1870), pp. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>, by a Pakeha Maori
(London, 1884), pp. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
among
the old
Prussians,
Greeks,
and
Romans.</note>
It has been affirmed that the old Prussians offered the
first-fruits of their crops and of their fishing to the god
Curcho, but doubt rests on the statement.<note place='foot'>Chr. Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Alt und neues
Preussen</hi> (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1684),
p. 161; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertationes historicae
de variis rebus Prussicis</hi>, p. 163 (appended
to his edition of P. de Dusburg's
<hi rend='italic'>Chronicon Prussiae</hi>, Frankfort
and Leipsic, 1679). Compare W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi> (Berlin,
1868), p. 27.</note> We have seen
that the Athenians and other Greek peoples offered the
first-fruits of the wheat and barley harvests to Demeter and
Persephone at Eleusis.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Troezenians sacrificed the
first-fruits to Poseidon, whom they worshipped as the
guardian deity of their city.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi>, 6.</note> In Attica the first-fruits of
the vintage were presented to Icarius and Erigone.<note place='foot'>Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>, 130.</note> The
Romans sacrificed the first ears of corn to Ceres, and the
first of the new wine to Liber; and until the priests had
offered these sacrifices, the people might not eat the new
corn nor drink the new wine.<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Sacrima,</q> p. 319,
ed. C. O. Müller; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xviii. 8.</note> In various parts of ancient
Italy the vintage was solemnly inaugurated by the priests.
At Rome the duty devolved on the Flamen Dialis, who
sacrificed a lamb to Jupiter and then gathered the first
grapes over the entrails of the victim. Till this ceremony
had been performed, the new wine might not be brought
into the city.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua Latina</hi>, vi. 16,
ed. C. O. Müller.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
of first-fruits
among the
Indians of
America. Chateaubriand's
description
of the harvest
festival
among the
Natchez.</note>
The Thompson River Indians of British Columbia used
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
to offer the first berries of the season to the earth, or more
generally to the mountains. The offering was made by an
old grey-haired person, who danced and held out the fruit
towards the mountain-tops. The rest of the people painted
their faces red and danced for some time.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia</hi>, p. 345
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
Memoir of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>, May, 1900).</note> The Okanaken
Indians of British Columbia <q>observed first-fruits ceremonies.
When the first berries or roots were ripe, the chief would
send out his wife or eldest daughter to gather a portion.
The whole community would then come together, and
prayers would be offered to those spirits of the sky who
were supposed to preside over the operations of nature,
portions of the fruit or roots would be distributed to all
present, after which any one was free to gather all he or
she desired; but no one would think of picking a berry
or digging a root until after the feast had been held.</q><note place='foot'>C. Hill Tout, <q>Report on the
Ethnology of the Okanaken of British
Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the R. Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xli. (1911) p. 132.</note>
When the ears of maize were formed, the Quiches of Central
America gathered the first-fruits and carried them to the
priests; moreover, they baked loaves or cakes, which they
offered to the idol who guarded their fields, but afterwards
these cakes were given to the poor or the infirm to eat.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et
de l'Amérique-Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
ii. 566.</note> It
was the custom of the Arkansas Indians to offer the first-fruits
of the ripe maize and melons to the Master of Life; even
children would die of hunger rather than touch the new
fruits before this offering had been made. Some of the
new maize, melons, and other fruits were minced up with
the carcase of a dog in the presence of the old men, who
alone were privileged to assist at this solemn rite. Then,
after performing certain ceremonies, the old men began to
dance, and some young girls, wound up to a pitch of
frenzy, threw themselves on the offering and bolted it
in an instant. Thereupon the old men seized the damsels
and ducked them in the river Arkansas, which had a
sobering influence on the minds of the devotees.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de l'Association de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, i. (Paris and
Lyons, 1826) p. 386.</note> From
this account we may perhaps infer that in eating the new
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
fruits the girls were believed to be inspired by the Master
of Life, who thus consumed the offering by deputy. The
chief solemnity of the Natchez, an Indian tribe on the Lower
Mississippi, was the Harvest Festival or the Festival of New
Fire. An early account of this ceremony has been already
submitted to the reader,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> but it may not be amiss to add
here for comparison the later description by Chateaubriand,
which differs from the other in some particulars, and lays
stress on the sacrifice rather than on the sacrament of first-fruits.
According to Chateaubriand, then, when the time
for the festival drew near, a crier went through the villages
calling upon the people to prepare new vessels and new
garments, to wash their houses, and to burn the old grain,
the old garments, and the old utensils in a common fire.
He also proclaimed an amnesty to criminals. Next day he
appeared again, commanding the people to fast for three
days, to abstain from all pleasures, and to make use of the
medicine of purification. Thereupon all the people took
some drops extracted from a root which they called the
<q>root of blood.</q> It was a kind of plantain and distilled a
red liquor which acted as a violent emetic. During their
three days' fast the people kept silence. At the end of it
the crier proclaimed that the festival would begin on the
following day. So next morning, as soon as it began to
grow light in the sky, the people streamed from all quarters
towards the temple of the Sun. The temple was a large
building with two doors, one opening to the east, the other
to the west. On this morning the eastern door of the
temple stood open. Facing the eastern door was an altar,
placed so as to catch the first beams of the rising sun. An
image of a <foreign rend='italic'>chouchouacha</foreign> (a small marsupial) stood upon the
altar; on its right was an image of a rattlesnake, on its left
an image of a marmoset. Before these images a fire of
oak-bark burned perpetually. Once a year only, on the
eve of the Harvest Festival, was the sacred flame suffered
to die out. To the right of the altar, on the morning of
this holy day, stood the great chief, who took his title and
traced his descent from the Sun. To the left of the altar
stood his wife. Round them were grouped, according to
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
their ranks, the war chiefs, the sachems, the heralds, and the
young braves. In front of the altar were piled bundles of
dry reeds, stacked in concentric rings.
</p>

<p>
The high priest, standing on the threshold of the
temple, kept his eyes fixed on the eastern horizon. Before
presiding at the festival he had to plunge thrice into the
Mississippi. In his hands he held two pieces of dry wood which
he kept rubbing slowly against each other, muttering magic
words. At his side two acolytes held two cups filled with
a kind of black sherbet. All the women, their backs turned
to the east, each leaning with one hand on her rude mattock
and supporting her infant with the other, stood in a great
semicircle at the gate of the temple. Profound silence
reigned throughout the multitude while the priest watched
attentively the growing light in the east. As soon as the
diffused light of dawn began to be shot with beams of fire,
he quickened the motion of the two pieces of wood which
he held in his hands; and at the moment when the upper
edge of the sun's disc appeared above the horizon, fire
flashed from the wood and was caught in tinder. At the
same instant the women outside the temple faced round and
held up their infants and their mattocks to the rising sun.
</p>

<p>
The great chief and his wife now drank the black liquor.
The priests kindled the circle of dried reeds; fire was set
to the heap of oak-bark on the altar, and from this sacred
flame all the hearths of the village were rekindled. No
sooner were the circles of reeds consumed than the chief's
wife came from the temple and placing herself at the head
of the women marched in procession to the harvest-fields,
whither the men were not allowed to follow them. They
went to gather the first sheaves of maize, and returned to
the temple bearing them on their heads. Some of the
sheaves they presented to the high priest, who laid them on
the altar. Others they used to bake the unleavened bread
which was to be eaten in the evening. The eastern door of
the sanctuary was now closed, and the western door was
opened.
</p>

<p>
When day began to decline, the multitude assembled
once more at the temple, this time at its western gate, where
they formed a great crescent, with the horns turned towards
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
the west. The unleavened bread was held up and presented
to the setting sun, and a priest struck up a hymn in praise
of his descending light. When darkness had fallen the
whole plain twinkled with fires, round which the people
feasted; and the sounds of music and revelry broke the
silence of night.<note place='foot'>Chateaubriand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>, pp. 130-136 (Michel Lévy, Paris,
1870).</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. Homoeopathic Magic of a Flesh Diet.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom
of killing
and eating
the corn-spirit
sacramentally.
Belief of
the savage
that by
eating an
animal or
man he
acquires
the qualities
of that
animal or
man.</note>
The practice of killing a god has now been traced amongst
peoples who have reached the agricultural stage of society.
We have seen that the spirit of the corn, or of other cultivated
plants, is commonly represented either in human or in
animal form, and that in some places a custom has prevailed
of killing annually either the human or the animal representative
of the god. One reason for thus killing the corn-spirit
in the person of his representative has been given implicitly
in an earlier part of this work: we may suppose that the
intention was to guard him or her (for the corn-spirit is
often feminine) from the enfeeblement of old age by transferring
the spirit, while still hale and hearty, to the person
of a youthful and vigorous successor. Apart from the
desirability of renewing his divine energies, the death of
the corn-spirit may have been deemed inevitable under the
sickles or the knives of the reapers, and his worshippers may
accordingly have felt bound to acquiesce in the sad necessity.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
But, further, we have found a widespread custom of eating
the god sacramentally, either in the shape of the man or
animal who represents the god, or in the shape of bread made
in human or animal form. The reasons for thus partaking of
the body of the god are, from the primitive standpoint, simple
enough. The savage commonly believes that by eating the
flesh of an animal or man he acquires not only the physical,
but even the moral and intellectual qualities which were
characteristic of that animal or man; so when the creature
is deemed divine, our simple savage naturally expects to
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
absorb a portion of its divinity along with its material
substance. It may be well to illustrate by instances this
common faith in the acquisition of virtues or vices of many
kinds through the medium of animal food, even when there is
no pretence that the viands consist of the body or blood of a
god. The doctrine forms part of the widely ramified system
of sympathetic or homoeopathic magic.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beliefs of
the American
Indians
as to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh of
animals.</note>
Thus, for example, the Creeks, Cherokee, and kindred
tribes of North American Indians <q>believe that nature
is possest of such a property, as to transfuse into men
and animals the qualities, either of the food they use,
or of those objects that are presented to their senses;
he who feeds on venison is, according to their physical
system, swifter and more sagacious than the man who
lives on the flesh of the clumsy bear, or helpless dunghill
fowls, the slow-footed tame cattle, or the heavy wallowing
swine. This is the reason that several of their old men
recommend, and say, that formerly their greatest chieftains
observed a constant rule in their diet, and seldom ate of any
animal of a gross quality, or heavy motion of body, fancying
it conveyed a dullness through the whole system, and disabled
them from exerting themselves with proper vigour in their
martial, civil, and religious duties.</q><note place='foot'>James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
American Indians</hi> (London, 1775),
p. 133.</note> The Zaparo Indians
of Ecuador <q>will, unless from necessity, in most cases not
eat any heavy meats, such as tapir and peccary, but confine
themselves to birds, monkeys, deer, fish, etc., principally
because they argue that the heavier meats make them
unwieldy, like the animals who supply the flesh, impeding
their agility, and unfitting them for the chase.</q><note place='foot'>Alfred Simson, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the
Wilds of Ecuador</hi> (London, 1887), p.
168; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, vii. (1878) p. 503.</note> Similarly
some of the Brazilian Indians would eat no beast, bird,
or fish that ran, flew, or swam slowly, lest by partaking of
its flesh they should lose their agility and be unable to
escape from their enemies.<note place='foot'>A. Thevet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Singularitez de la
France Antarctique, autrement nommée
Amerique</hi> (Antwerp, 1558), p. 55; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>La Cosmographie Universelle</hi> (Paris,
1575), ii. pp. 929, [963], 940 [974];
J. Lerius, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Navigationis in
Brasiliam, quae et America dicitur</hi>
(1586), pp. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Caribs abstained from the
flesh of pigs lest it should cause them to have small eyes
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
like pigs; and they refused to partake of tortoises from a
fear that if they did so they would become heavy and stupid
like the animal.<note place='foot'>Rochefort, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Naturelle et
Morale des Iles Antilles</hi>, Seconde
Edition (Rotterdam, 1665), p. 465.</note> Among the Fans of West Africa men in
the prime of life never eat tortoises for a similar reason; they
imagine that if they did so, their vigour and fleetness of foot
would be gone. But old men may eat tortoises freely,
because having already lost the power of running they can
take no harm from the flesh of the slow-footed creature.<note place='foot'>C. Cuny, <q>De Libreville au
Cameroun,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de
Géographie</hi> (Paris), vii. Série, xvii.
(1896) p. 342.</note>
Some of the Chiriguanos of eastern Bolivia would not touch
the flesh of the vicuña, because they imagined that if they
ate it they would become woolly like the vicuña.<note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>,
ii. (London, 1817) p. 373; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iii.
(London, 1819) p. 164.</note> On the
other hand the Abipones of Paraguay ate the flesh of
jaguars in order to acquire the courage of the beast;<note place='foot'>P. Lozano, <hi rend='italic'>Descripcion Chorographica
del Gran Chaco</hi> (Cordova,
1733), p. 90.</note> indeed
the number of jaguars which they consumed for this
object is said to have been very great, and with a like
intent they eagerly devoured the flesh of bulls, stags, boars,
and ant-bears, being persuaded that by frequently partaking
of such food they increased their strength, activity, and
courage. On the other hand they all abhorred the thought
of eating hens, eggs, sheep, fish, and tortoises, because they
believed that these tender viands begot sloth and listlessness
in their bodies and cowardice in their minds.<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de
Abiponibus</hi> (Vienna, 1784), i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
Thompson Indians of British Columbia would not eat the
heart of the fool-hen, nor would they allow their dogs to
devour the bird, lest they should grow foolish like the bird.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia</hi>, p. 348 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, April, 1900).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bushman
beliefs as
to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh of
animals.</note>
While many savages thus fear to eat the flesh of slow-footed
animals lest they should themselves become slow-footed,
the Bushmen of South Africa purposely ate the flesh
of such creatures, and the reason which they gave for doing
so exhibits a curious refinement of savage philosophy. They
imagined that the game which they pursued would be
influenced sympathetically by the food in the body of the
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
hunter, so that if he had eaten of swift-footed animals, the
quarry would be swift-footed also and would escape him;
whereas if he had eaten of slow-footed animals, the quarry
would also be slow-footed, and he would be able to overtake
and kill it. For that reason hunters of gemsbok particularly
avoided eating the flesh of the swift and agile springbok;
indeed they would not even touch it with their hands, because
they believed the springbok to be a very lively creature
which did not go to sleep at night, and they thought that if
they ate springbok, the gemsbok which they hunted would
likewise not be willing to go to sleep, even at night. How,
then, could they catch it?<note place='foot'>W. H. I. Bleek and C. L. Lloyd,
<hi rend='italic'>Specimens of Bushman Folklore</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 271-275.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other
African
beliefs as
to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh of
animals. Ancient
beliefs as
to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh of
animals.</note>
Certain tribes on the Upper Zambesi believe in transmigration,
and every man in his lifetime chooses the kind of animal
whose body he wishes at death to enter. He then performs
an initiatory rite, which consists in swallowing the maggots
bred in the putrid carcase of the animal of his choice;
thenceforth he partakes of that animal's nature. And on
the occasion of a calamity, while the women are giving themselves
up to lamentation, you will see one man writhing on
the ground like a boa constrictor or a crocodile, another
howling and leaping like a panther, a third baying like a
jackal, roaring like a lion, or grunting like a hippopotamus,
all of them imitating the characters of the various animals to
perfection.<note place='foot'>A. Bertrand, <hi rend='italic'>The Kingdom of the
Barotsi, Upper Zambezia</hi> (London,
1899), p. 277, quoting the description
given by the French missionary M.
Coillard.</note> Clearly these people imagine that the soul or
vital essence of the animal is manifested in the maggots bred
in its decaying carcase; hence they imagine that by swallowing
the maggots they imbue themselves with the very life
and spirit of the creature which they desire to become. The
Namaquas abstain from eating the flesh of hares, because
they think it would make them faint-hearted as a hare.
But they eat the flesh of the lion, or drink the blood of the
leopard or lion, to get the courage and strength of these
beasts.<note place='foot'>Theophilus Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</hi>
(London, 1881), p. 106.</note> The Bushmen will not give their children a jackal's
heart to eat, lest it should make them timid like the jackal;
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
but they give them a leopard's heart to eat to make them
brave like the leopard.<note place='foot'>W. H. I. Bleek and L. C. Lloyd,
<hi rend='italic'>Specimens of Bushman Folklore</hi> (London,
1911), p. 373.</note> When a Wagogo man of German
East Africa kills a lion, he eats the heart in order to become
brave like a lion; but he thinks that to eat the heart of a hen
would make him timid.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Cole, <q>Notes on the
Wagogo of German East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 318.</note> Among the Ja-luo, a tribe of Nilotic
negroes, young men eat the flesh of leopards in order to
make themselves fierce in war.<note place='foot'>Sir Harry Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>The Uganda
Protectorate</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1904), ii. 787.</note> The flesh of the lion and
also that of the spotted leopard are sometimes cooked and
eaten by native warriors in South-Eastern Africa, who hope
thereby to become as brave as lions.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in
Africa</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1890), p. 174; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xix. (1890)
p. 282.</note> When a Zulu army
assembles to go forth to battle, the warriors eat slices of
meat which is smeared with a powder made of the dried
flesh of various animals, such as the leopard, lion, elephant,
snakes, and so on; for thus it is thought that the soldiers
will acquire the bravery and other warlike qualities of these
animals. Sometimes if a Zulu has killed a wild beast, for
instance a leopard, he will give his children the blood to
drink, and will roast the heart for them to eat, expecting
that they will thus grow up brave and daring men. But
others say that this is dangerous, because it is apt to produce
courage without prudence, and to make a man rush
heedlessly on his death.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious
System of the Amazulu</hi>, p. 438, note 16.</note> Among the Wabondei of Eastern
Africa the heart of a lion or leopard is eaten with the
intention of making the eater strong and brave.<note place='foot'>O. Baumann, <hi rend='italic'>Usambara und seine
Nachbargebiete</hi> (Berlin, 1891), p. 128.</note> In British
Central Africa aspirants after courage consume the flesh and
especially the hearts of lions, while lecherous persons eat the
testicles of goats.<note place='foot'>Sir H. H. Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>British
Central Africa</hi> (London, 1897), p.
438; J. Buchanan, <hi rend='italic'>The Shire Highlands</hi>,
p. 138.</note> Among the Suk of British East Africa
the fat and heart of a lion are sometimes given to children
to eat in order that they may become strong; but they are
not allowed to know what they are eating.<note place='foot'>M. W. H. Beech, <hi rend='italic'>The Suk,
their Language and Folklore</hi> (Oxford,
1911), p. 11.</note> Arab women
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
in North Africa give their male children a piece of a lion's
heart to eat to make them fearless.<note place='foot'>J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal
and the Zulu Country</hi> (London, 1857),
p. 399.</note> The flesh of an
elephant is thought by the Ewe-speaking peoples of West
Africa to make the eater strong.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West
Africa</hi> (London, 1890), p. 99.</note> Before they go forth
to fight, Wajagga warriors drink a magical potion, which
often consists of shavings of the horn and hide of a rhinoceros
mixed with beer; this is supposed to impart to them the
strength and force of the animal.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Rechtsverhältnisse
und Sitten der Wadschagga</hi> (Gotha,
1902), p. 38 (<hi rend='italic'>Petermanns Mitteilungen,
Ergänzungsheft</hi>, No. 138).</note> When a serious disease
has attacked a Zulu kraal, the medicine-man takes the bone
of a very old dog, or the bone of an old cow, bull, or other
very old animal, and administers it to the healthy as well as
to the sick people, in order that they may live to be as old
as the animal of whose bone they have partaken.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Nursery Tales,
Traditions, and Histories of the Zulus</hi>
(Natal and London, 1868), p. 175 note.</note> So to
restore the aged Aeson to youth, the witch Medea infused
into his veins a decoction of the liver of the long-lived deer
and the head of a crow that had outlived nine generations
of men.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> vii. 271 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As
to the supposed longevity of deer and
crows, see L. Stephani, in <hi rend='italic'>Compte
Rendu de la Commission Archéologique</hi>
(St. Petersburg), 1863, pp. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
and my note on Pausanias, viii. 10. 10.</note> In antiquity the flesh of deer and crows was
eaten for other purposes than that of prolonging life. As
deer were supposed not to suffer from fever, some women
used to taste venison every morning, and it is said that in
consequence they lived to a great age without ever being
attacked by a fever; only the venison lost all its virtue if
the animal had been killed by more blows than one.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 119.</note> Again,
ancient diviners sought to imbue themselves with the spirit
of prophecy by swallowing vital portions of birds and beasts
of omen; for example, they thought that by eating the hearts
of crows or moles or hawks they took into their bodies,
along with the flesh, the prophetic soul of the creature.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De Abstinentia</hi>, ii. 48:
οἱ γοῦν ζώων μαντικῶν ψυχὰς δέξασθαι
βουλόμενοι εἰς ἑαυτούς, τὰ κυριώτατα
μόρια καταπιόντες, οἷον καρδίας κοράκων
ἢ ἀσπαλάκων ἢ ἱεράκων, ἔχουσι παριοῦσαν
τὴν ψυχὴν καὶ χρηματίζουσαν ὡς θεὸν
καὶ εἰσιοῦσαν εἰς αὐτοὺς ἄμα τῇ ἐνθέσει
τῇ τοῦ σώματος. Pliny also mentions
the custom of eating the heart of a
mole, raw and palpitating, as a means
of acquiring skill in divination (<hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Hist.</hi> xxx. 19).</note>
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beliefs of
the Dyaks
and Aino
as to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh of
animals.</note>
Among the Dyaks of North-West Borneo young men
and warriors may not eat venison, because it would make
them as timid as deer; but the women and very old men
are free to eat it.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi>, Second Edition
(London, 1863), i. 186, 206.</note> However, among the Kayans of the
same region, who share the same view as to the ill effect of
eating venison, men will partake of the dangerous viand
provided it is cooked in the open air, for then the timid
spirit of the animal is supposed to escape at once into the
jungle and not to enter into the eater.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life of
Borneo Head-hunters</hi> (Philadelphia,
1902), p. 71; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Aino of Japan
think that the otter is a very forgetful animal, and they often
call a person with a bad memory an <q>otter head.</q> Therefore
it is a rule with them that <q>the otter's head must not
lightly be used as an article of food, for unless people are
very careful they will, if they eat it, become as forgetful as
that creature. And hence it happens that when an otter
has been killed the people do not usually eat the head. But
if they are seized with a very strong desire for a feast of
otter's head, they may partake thereof, providing proper
precautions are taken. When eating it the people must
take their swords, knives, axes, bows and arrows, tobacco-boxes
and pipes, trays, cups, garden tools, and everything
they possess, tie them up in bundles with carrying slings,
and sit with them attached to their heads while in the act
of eating. This feast may be partaken of in this way, and
no other. If this method be carefully adhered to, there will
be no danger of forgetting where a thing has been placed,
otherwise loss of memory will be the result.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), pp.
511-513.</note> On the other
hand the Aino believe that the heart of the water-ousel is
exceedingly wise, and that in speech the bird is most eloquent.
Therefore whenever he is killed, he should be at once torn
open and his heart wrenched out and swallowed before it
has time to grow cold or suffer damage of any kind. If a
man swallows it thus, he will become very fluent and wise,
and will be able to argue down all his adversaries.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
337.</note> In
Northern India people fancy that if you eat the eyeballs
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
of an owl you will be able like an owl to see in the
dark.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 279.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beliefs as
to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh
of dogs,
tigers, etc.</note>
When the Kansas Indians were going to war, a
feast used to be held in the chief's hut, and the principal
dish was dog's flesh, because, said the Indians, the
animal who is so brave that he will let himself be cut in
pieces in defence of his master, must needs inspire valour.<note place='foot'>Bossu, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Voyages aux
Indes occidentales</hi> (Paris, 1768), i.
112.</note>
On extraordinary occasions the bravest warriors of the
Dacotas used to perform a dance at which they devoured
the livers of dogs raw and warm in order thereby to acquire
the sagacity and bravery of the dog. The animals were
thrown to them alive, killed, and cut open; then the livers
were extracted, cut into strips, and hung on a pole. Each
dancer grabbed at a strip of liver with his teeth and chewed
and swallowed it as he danced: he might not touch it with
his hands, only the medicine-man enjoyed that privilege.
Women did not join in the dance.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi>, ii. (Philadelphia,
1853) pp. 79 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Men of the Buru and
Aru Islands, East Indies, eat the flesh of dogs in order to
be bold and nimble in war.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi> (The Hague, 1886), pp. 10,
262.</note> Amongst the Papuans of the
Port Moresby and Motumotu districts, New Guinea, young
lads eat strong pig, wallaby, and large fish, in order to
acquire the strength of the animal or fish.<note place='foot'>James Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in
New Guinea</hi> (London, 1887), p. 166.</note> Some of the
natives of Northern Australia fancy that by eating the
flesh of the kangaroo or emu they are enabled to jump
or run faster than before.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxiv. (1895) p. 179.</note> The Miris of Assam prize
tiger's flesh as food for men; it gives them strength and
courage. But <q>it is not suited for women; it would make
them too strong-minded.</q><note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi> (Calcutta, 1872), p. 33.</note> In Corea the bones of tigers
fetch a higher price than those of leopards as a means of
inspiring courage. A Chinaman in Seoul bought and ate a
whole tiger to make himself brave and fierce.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, N.S., viii. (1886)
p. 307.</note> The special
seat of courage, according to the Chinese, is the gall-bladder;
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
so they sometimes procure the gall-bladders of tigers and bears,
and eat the bile in the belief that it will give them courage.<note place='foot'>J. Henderson, <q>The Medicine
and Medical Practice of the Chinese,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the North China Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, New Series,
i. (Shanghai, 1865) pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
Mrs. Bishop, <hi rend='italic'>Korea and her
Neighbours</hi> (London, 1898), i. 79.</note>
Again, the Similkameen Indians of British Columbia imagine
that to eat the heart of a bear inspires courage.<note place='foot'>Mrs. S. S. Allison, <q>Account of
the Similkameen Indians of British
Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxi. (1892) p. 313.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Beliefs as
to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh of
wolves,
bears, and
serpents.</note>
In Norse legend, Ingiald, son of King Aunund, was timid
in his youth, but after eating the heart of a wolf he became very
bold; Hialto gained strength and courage by eating the heart
of a bear and drinking its blood;<note place='foot'>P. E. Müller on Saxo Grammaticus,
<hi rend='italic'>Historia Danica</hi> (Copenhagen, 1839-1858),
vol. ii. p. 60.</note> and when Sigurd killed
the dragon Fafnir and tasted his heart's blood, he acquired
thereby a knowledge of the language of birds.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die Edda</hi>, übersetzt von K. Simrock<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>8</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1882), pp. 180, 309.</note> The belief
that the language of birds or of animals in general can be
learned by eating some part of a serpent appears to be
ancient and wide-spread. Democritus is reported to have
said that serpents were generated from the mixed blood of
certain birds, and that therefore whoever ate a serpent
would understand the bird language.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Natur.</hi> x. 137, xxix.
72.</note> The Arabs in antiquity
were supposed to be able to draw omens from birds
because they had gained a knowledge of the bird language
by eating either the heart or liver of a serpent; and the
people of Paraka in India are said to have learned the language
of animals in general by the same means.<note place='foot'>Philostratus, <hi rend='italic'>Vita Apollonii</hi>, i. 20,
iii. 9.</note> Saxo
Grammaticus relates how Rollo acquired all knowledge,
including an understanding of the speech of animals, both
wild and tame, by eating of a black serpent.<note place='foot'>Saxo Grammaticus, <hi rend='italic'>Historia
Danica</hi>, ed. P. E. Müller (Copenhagen,
1839-1858), i. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Norway,
Sweden, and Jutland down to the nineteenth century the
flesh of a white snake was thought to confer supernatural
wisdom on the eater;<note place='foot'>P. E. Müller, note in his edition
of Saxo Grammaticus, vol. ii. p. 146.</note> it is a German and Bohemian
superstition that whoever eats serpent's flesh understands
the language of animals.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 110,
§ 153; J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben
und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und
Mähren</hi> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864),
p. 230, § 1658.</note> Notions of the same sort, based
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
no doubt on a belief in the extraordinary wisdom or subtlety
of the serpent, often meet us in popular tales and traditions.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Kinder- und Hausmärchen</hi>,
No. 17; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1865-1866), No. 132 (vol. i. pp. 174-176);
A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848), p. 154;
A. Waldau, <hi rend='italic'>Böhmisches Märchenbuch</hi>
(Prague, 1860), pp. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Von
Alpenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</hi>
(Zurich, 1857), pp. 302 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. von
Schulenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Wendische Volkssagen und
Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald</hi> (Leipsic,
1880), p. 96; P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions
et Superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne</hi>
(Paris, 1882), ii. 224; W. Grant
Stewart, <hi rend='italic'>The Popular Superstitions
and Festive Amusements of the Highlanders
of Scotland</hi>, New Edition
(London, 1851), pp. 53, 56; J. F.
Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales of the West
Highlands</hi>, New Edition (Paisley and
London, 1890), No. 47, vol. ii. pp.
377 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Prym und A. Socin,
<hi rend='italic'>Syrische Sagen und Maerchen</hi> (Göttingen,
1881), pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the serpent
in relation to the acquisition by men of
the language of animals, see further my
article, <q>The Language of Animals,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>The Archaeological Review</hi>, i. (1888)
pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Sometimes serpents have
been thought to impart a knowledge of
the language of animals voluntarily by
licking the ears of the seer. See
Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 9. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, iii. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Various
beliefs as
to the
homoeopathic
magic of
the flesh
of animals.</note>
In Morocco lethargic patients are given ants to swallow,
and to eat lion's flesh will make a coward brave;<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>
(London, 1876), p. 281.</note> but people
abstain from eating the hearts of fowls, lest thereby they should
be rendered timid.<note place='foot'>M. Quedenfelt, <q>Aberglaube und
halb-religiöse Bruderschaft bei den
Marokkanarn,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1886, p.
682 (bound up with the <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xviii. 1886).</note> When a child is late in learning to speak,
the Turks of Central Asia will give it the tongues of certain
birds to eat.<note place='foot'>H. Vambery, <hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi>
(Leipsic, 1885), p. 218.</note> A North American Indian thought that
brandy must be a decoction of hearts and tongues, <q>because,</q>
said he, <q>after drinking it I fear nothing, and I talk wonderfully.</q><note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi> (Paris, 1744), vi. 8.</note>
In Java there is a tiny earthworm which now and
then utters a shrill sound like that of the alarum of a small
clock. Hence when a public dancing girl has screamed
herself hoarse in the exercise of her calling, the leader of
the troop makes her eat some of these worms, in the belief
that thus she will regain her voice and will, after swallowing
them, be able to scream as shrilly as ever.<note place='foot'>P. J. Veth, <q>De leer der Signatuur,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, vii. (1894) pp. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The people of
Darfur, in Central Africa, think that the liver is the seat of
the soul, and that a man may enlarge his soul by eating
the liver of an animal. <q>Whenever an animal is killed its
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
liver is taken out and eaten, but the people are most careful
not to touch it with their hands, as it is considered sacred;
it is cut up in small pieces and eaten raw, the bits being
conveyed to the mouth on the point of a knife, or the sharp
point of a stick. Any one who may accidentally touch the
liver is strictly forbidden to partake of it, which prohibition
is regarded as a great misfortune for him.</q> Women are not
allowed to eat liver, because they have no soul.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the For
Tribe of Central Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh</hi>, xiii.
(1884-1886) p. 218.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The flesh
and blood,
but
especially
the hearts,
of dead
men eaten
or drunk
for the sake
of acquiring
the good
qualities of
the dead.</note>
Again, the flesh and blood of dead men are commonly
eaten and drunk to inspire bravery, wisdom, or other qualities
for which the men themselves were remarkable, or which are
supposed to have their special seat in the particular part
eaten. Thus among the mountain tribes of South-Eastern
Africa there are ceremonies by which the youths are formed
into guilds or lodges, and among the rites of initiation there
is one which is intended to infuse courage, intelligence, and
other qualities into the novices. Whenever an enemy who
has behaved with conspicuous bravery is killed, his liver,
which is considered the seat of valour; his ears, which are
supposed to be the seat of intelligence; the skin of his
forehead, which is regarded as the seat of perseverance; his
testicles, which are held to be the seat of strength; and
other members, which are viewed as the seat of other virtues,
are cut from his body and baked to cinders. The ashes
are carefully kept in the horn of a bull, and, during the
ceremonies observed at circumcision, are mixed with other
ingredients into a kind of paste, which is administered by
the tribal priest to the youths. By this means the strength,
valour, intelligence, and other virtues of the slain are believed
to be imparted to the eaters.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <q>Manners,
Customs, etc., of the South African
Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xx. (1891) p. 116; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi> (London, 1890), p.
212. Compare Rev. E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The
Basutos</hi> (London, 1861), pp. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi>
(London, 1904), p. 309.</note> When Basutos of the mountains
have killed a very brave foe, they immediately cut out
his heart and eat it, because this is supposed to give them his
courage and strength in battle. At the close of the war the
man who has slain such a foe is called before the chief and
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
gets from the doctor a medicine which he chews with his
food. The third day after this he must wash his body in
running water, and at the expiry of ten days he may return
to his wives and children.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xx. (1891)
p. 138; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi>, p. 220.</note> So an Ovambo warrior in battle
will tear out the heart of his slain foe in the belief that by
eating it he can acquire the bravery of the dead man.<note place='foot'>H. Schinz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Südwest-Afrika</hi>
(Oldenburg and Leipsic, preface
dated 1891), p. 320.</note> A
similar belief and practice prevail among some of the tribes
of British Central Africa, notably among the Angoni. These
tribes also mutilate the dead and reduce the severed parts to
ashes. Afterwards the ashes are stirred into a broth or gruel,
<q>which must be <q>lapped</q> up with the hand and thrown into
the mouth, but not eaten as ordinary food is taken, to give
the soldiers courage, perseverance, fortitude, strategy, patience
and wisdom.</q><note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <q>East Central
African Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxii. (1893)
p. 111. Compare J. Buchanan, <hi rend='italic'>The
Shire Highlands</hi>, p. 138; Sir H. H.
Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>British Central Africa</hi>
(London, 1897), p. 438.</note> In former times whenever a Nandi warrior
killed an enemy he used to eat a morsel of the dead man's
heart to make himself brave.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 27.</note> The Wagogo of German
East Africa do the same thing for the same purpose.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Cole, <q>Notes on the
Wagogo of German East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 318.</note>
When Sir Charles M'Carthy was killed by the Ashantees in
1824, it is said that his heart was devoured by the chiefs of
the Ashantee army, who hoped by this means to imbibe his
courage. His flesh was dried and parcelled out among the
lower officers for the same purpose, and his bones were
long kept at Coomassie as national fetishes.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1856), pp. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Amazons
of Dahomey used to eat the hearts of foes remarkable
for their bravery, in order that some of the intrepidity
which animated them might be transfused into the eaters.
In former days, if report may be trusted, the hearts of
enemies who enjoyed a reputation for sagacity were also
eaten, for the Ewe-speaking negro of these regions holds that
the heart is the seat of the intellect as well as of courage.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi> (London,
1890), pp. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Yoruba-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast the
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
priests of Ogun, the war-god, usually take out the hearts of
human victims, which are then dried, crumbled to powder,
mixed with rum, and sold to aspirants after courage, who
swallow the mixture in the belief that they thereby absorb
the manly virtue of which the heart is supposed to be the
seat.<note place='foot'>A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Yoruba-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi> (London,
1894), p. 69.</note> Similarly, Indians of the Orinoco region used to toast
the hearts of their enemies, grind them to powder, and then
drink the powder in a liquid in order to be brave and valiant
the next time they went forth to fight.<note place='foot'>A. Caulin, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Coro-graphica
natural y evangelica dela Nueva Andalucia</hi>
(1779), p. 98.</note> The Nauras Indians
of New Granada ate the hearts of Spaniards when they had
the opportunity, hoping thereby to make themselves as
dauntless as the dreaded Castilian chivalry.<note place='foot'>A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History
of the vast Continent and Islands of
America</hi>, translated by Capt. J. Stevens
(London, 1725-1726), vi. 187.</note> The Sioux
Indians of North America used to reduce to powder the
heart of a valiant enemy and swallow the powder, hoping thus
to appropriate the dead man's valour.<note place='foot'>F. de Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition dans
les parties centrales de l'Amérique du
Sud</hi> (Paris, 1850-1851), iv. 382.</note> The Muskoghees
also thought that to eat the heart of a foe would <q>communicate
and give greater heart against the enemy. They
also think that the vigorous faculties of the mind are derived
from the brain, on which account, I have seen some of their
heroes drink out of a human skull; they imagine, they only
imbibe the good qualities it formerly contained.</q><note place='foot'>James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
American Indians</hi> (London, 1775), p.
135.</note> For a
similar reason in Uganda a priest used to drink beer out of
the skull of a dead king in order that he might be possessed
by the king's spirit.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxi. (1901) pp. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Further
Notes on the Manners and Customs of
the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p. 45.</note> Among the Esquimaux of Bering
Strait, when young men had slain an enemy for the first time
in war, they were wont to drink some of the blood and to eat
a small piece of the heart of their victim in order to increase
their bravery.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo about
Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington, 1899)
p. 328.</note> In some tribes of North-Western Australia,
when a man dies who had been a great warrior or hunter,
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
his friends cut out the fat about his heart and eat it, because
they believe that it imparts to them the courage and cunning
of the deceased.<note place='foot'>E. Clement, <q>Ethnographical
Notes on the Western Australian
Aborigines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, xvi. (1904) p. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other parts
than the
heart are
eaten for
the purpose
of acquiring
the virtues
of the
deceased.</note>
But while the human heart is thus commonly eaten
for the sake of imbuing the eater with the qualities of
its original owner, it is not, as we have already seen,
the only part of the body which is consumed for this
purpose. Thus in New Caledonia the victors in a fight
used to eat the bodies of the slain, <q>not, as might be
supposed, from a taste for human flesh, but in order to
assimilate part of the bravery which the deceased was
supposed to possess.</q><note place='foot'>O. Opigez, <q>Aperçu général sur la
Nouvelle-Calédonie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la
Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), vii. Série,
vii. (1886) p. 433.</note> Among the tribes about Maryborough
in Queensland, when a man was killed in a ceremonial
fight, it was customary for his friends to skin and
eat him, in order that his warlike virtues might pass into
the eaters.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
p. 753.</note> Warriors of the Theddora and Ngarigo tribes
in South-Eastern Australia used to eat the hands and feet
of their slain enemies, believing that in this way they
acquired some of the qualities and courage of the dead.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 752.</note>
In the Dieri tribe of Central Australia, when a man had
been condemned and killed by a properly constituted party
of executioners, the weapons with which the deed was done
were washed in a small wooden vessel, and the bloody
mixture was administered to all the slayers in a prescribed
manner, while they lay down on their backs and the elders
poured it into their mouths. This was believed to give them
double strength, courage, and great nerve for any future
enterprise.<note place='foot'>S. Gason, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxiv. (1895) p.
172.</note> The Kamilaroi of New South Wales ate the
liver as well as the heart of a brave man to get his courage.<note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ridley, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi> (Sydney,
1875), p. 160.</note>
In Tonquin also there is a popular superstition that the liver
of a brave man makes brave any who partake of it. Hence
when a Catholic missionary was beheaded in Tonquin in 1837,
the executioner cut out the liver of his victim and ate part of
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
it, while a soldier attempted to devour another part of it raw.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation de la
Foi</hi>, xi. (Lyons, 1838-1839) p. 258.</note>
With a like intent the Chinese swallow the bile of notorious
bandits who have been executed.<note place='foot'>J. Henderson, <q>The Medicine
and Medical Practice of the Chinese,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the North China Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, New Series,
i. (Shanghai, 1865) pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Dyaks of Sarawak
used to eat the palms of the hands and the flesh of the
knees of the slain in order to steady their own hands and
strengthen their own knees.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruyt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes,
en zijne Beteekenis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en
Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie
van Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
Vierde Reeks, iii. (Amsterdam,
1899) p. 201.</note> The Tolalaki, notorious head-hunters
of Central Celebes, drink the blood and eat the
brains of their victims that they may become brave.<note place='foot'>N. Adriani en A. C. Kruijt,
<q>Van Posso naar Mori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xliv. (1900) p.
162.</note> The
Italones of the Philippine Islands drink the blood of their
slain enemies, and eat part of the back of their heads and of
their entrails raw to acquire their courage. For the same
reason the Efugaos, another tribe of the Philippines, suck
the brains of their foes.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Der Ahnencultus
und die religiösen Anschauungen der
Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Wiener Geograph.
Gesellschaft</hi>, 1882, p. 154; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Versuch
einer Ethnographie der Philippinen</hi>
(Gotha, 1882), p. 32 (<hi rend='italic'>Petermann's
Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</hi>, No.
67).</note> In like manner the Kai of German
New Guinea eat the brains of the enemies they kill in order
to acquire their strength.<note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben
der Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss's <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) p. 131.</note> Among the Kimbunda of Western
Africa, when a new king succeeds to the throne, a brave
prisoner of war is killed in order that the king and nobles
may eat his flesh, and so acquire his strength and courage.<note place='foot'>L. Magyar, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Süd-Afrika
in den Jahren 1849-1857</hi> (Buda-Pesth
and Leipsic, 1859), pp. 273-276.</note>
The notorious Zulu chief Matuana drank the gall of thirty
chiefs, whose people he had destroyed, in the belief that it
would make him strong.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of
Natal</hi> (London, 1857), p. 216.</note> It is a Zulu fancy that by eating
the centre of the forehead and the eyebrow of an enemy
they acquire the power of looking steadfastly at a foe.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Nursery Tales,
Traditions and Histories of the Zulus</hi>
(Natal and London, 1868), p. 163
note.</note> In
Tud or Warrior Island, Torres Straits, men would drink the
sweat of renowned warriors, and eat the scrapings from
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
their finger-nails which had become coated and sodden with
human blood. This was done <q>to make strong and like
stone; no afraid.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <q>The Ethnography
of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xix. (1890) p. 414, compare p. 312;
<hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>,
v. (Cambridge, 1904) p. 301.</note> In Nagir, another island of Torres
Straits, in order to infuse courage into boys a warrior used
to take the eye and tongue of a man whom he had
killed, and after mincing them and mixing them with
his urine he administered the compound to the boy,
who received it with shut eyes and open mouth seated
between the warrior's legs.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 420;
<hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>,
v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Before every warlike expedition
the people of Minahassa in Celebes used to take
the locks of hair of a slain foe and dabble them in boiling
water to extract the courage; this infusion of bravery was
then drunk by the warriors.<note place='foot'>S. J. Hickson, <hi rend='italic'>A Naturalist in
North Celebes</hi> (London, 1889), p. 216.</note> In New Zealand <q>the chief
was an <foreign rend='italic'>atua</foreign> [god], but there were powerful and powerless
gods; each naturally sought to make himself one of the
former; the plan therefore adopted was to incorporate the
spirits of others with their own; thus, when a warrior slew
a chief, he immediately gouged out his eyes and swallowed
them, the <foreign rend='italic'>atua tonga</foreign>, or divinity, being supposed to reside
in that organ; thus he not only killed the body, but also
possessed himself of the soul of his enemy, and consequently
the more chiefs he slew the greater did his
divinity become.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1870), p.
352. Compare <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 173; W.
Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1831-1836), i. 358;
J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour
du Monde et à la recherche de la
Pérouse sur la corvette Astrolabe</hi> (Paris,
1832-1833), ii. 547; E. Tregear,
<q>The Maoris of New Zealand,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xix. (1890) p. 108.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Moral
virtues of
the dead
acquired
through
simple contact
with
their bones.</note>
Even without absorbing any part of a man's bodily
substance it is sometimes thought possible to acquire
his moral virtues through simple contact with his bones.
Thus among the Toradjas of Central Celebes, when a
youth is being circumcised he is made to sit on the skull
of a slain foe in order to make him brave in war;<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruyt, <q>Het koppensnellen
der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes,
en zijne Beteekenis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en
Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie
van Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling
Letterkunde, Vierde Reeks, iii.
(Amsterdam, 1899) p. 166.</note> and
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
when Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, was dead, the Turks,
who had often felt the force of his arm in battle, are said to
have imagined that by wearing a piece of his bones near
their heart they should be animated with a strength and
valour like his.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Spectator</hi>, No. 316, March
3, 1712; Gibbon, <hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>,
ch. lxvii.</note> A peculiar form of communion with the
dead is practised by the Gallas of Eastern Africa. They
think that food from the house of a dead man, especially
food that he liked, or that he cooked for himself, contains
a portion of his life or soul. If at the funeral feast a man
eats some of that food, he fancies that he has thereby
absorbed some of the life or soul of the departed, a portion
of his spirit, intelligence, or courage.<note place='foot'>Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie
Nordost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur
der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi> (Berlin,
1896), p. 56.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Savages
sometimes
seek to
form a
covenant of
friendship
with their
dead foes
by drinking
their blood.</note>
Strange as it may seem to us, one motive which induces
a savage warrior to eat the flesh or drink the blood of the foe
whom he has slain appears to be a wish to form an indissoluble
covenant of friendship and brotherhood with his victim.
For it is a widespread belief among savages that by transfusing
a little of their blood into each other's bodies two
men become kinsmen and allies; the same blood now
circulating in the veins of both, neither can injure the other
without at the same time injuring himself; the two have therefore
given each other the strongest bond, the best possible
hostages, for their good behaviour.<note place='foot'>For examples of the blood-covenant
see H. C. Trumbull, <hi rend='italic'>The Blood
Covenant</hi> (London, 1887). The custom
is particularly common in Africa.</note> Acting on this theory,
the primitive warrior seeks to convert his slain foe into the
firmest of friends by imbibing the dead man's blood or
swallowing his flesh. That at all events appears to be the
idea at the root of the following customs. When an Arawak
Indian of British Guiana has murdered another, he repairs
on the third night to the grave of his victim, and pressing
a pointed stick through the corpse he licks off and swallows
any blood that he finds adhering to the stick. For he
believes that if he did not taste his victim's blood, he would
go mad and die; whereas by swallowing the blood he
averts any ill consequences that might flow to him from the
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
murder.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Bernau, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary
Labours in British Guiana</hi> (London,
1847), pp. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R Schomburgk,
<hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Britisch-Guiana</hi> (Leipsic,
1847-1848), ii. 497.</note> The belief and practice of the Nandi are similar:
<q>To the present day, when a person of another tribe has been
slain by a Nandi, the blood must be carefully washed off the
spear or sword into a cup made of grass, and drunk by the
slayer. If this is not done it is thought that the man will
become frenzied.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 27.</note> So among the tribes of the Lower Niger
<q>it is customary and necessary for the executioner to lick the
blood that is on the blade</q>; moreover, <q>the custom of licking
the blood off the blade of a sword by which a man has
been killed in war is common to all these tribes, and the
explanation given me by the Ibo, which is generally accepted,
is, that if this was not done, the act of killing would so
affect the strikers as to cause them to run amok among their
own people; because the sight and smell of blood render
them absolutely senseless as well as regardless of all consequences.
And this licking the blood is the only sure remedy,
and the only way in which they can recover themselves.</q><note place='foot'>A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower Niger
and its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906), pp.
180, 181 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among the Shans executioners believe that they would soon
fall ill and die if they did not taste the blood of their victims.<note place='foot'>Mrs. Leslie Milne, <hi rend='italic'>Shans at Home</hi>
(London, 1910), p. 192.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Blood-covenant
formed by
manslayers
with the
ghosts of
their
victims.</note>
The most probable explanation of these practices
seems to be that a manslayer is thought to be driven mad
by the ghost of his victim, who takes possession of his
murderer's body and causes him to demean himself in a
frantic manner; whereas, as soon as the slayer has tasted
the blood of the slain, he becomes a blood-brother of his
victim, whose ghost accordingly will do him no harm.<note place='foot'>The Kukis of north-eastern India
believe that the ghost of an animal as
well as of a man will haunt its slayer
and drive him mad unless he performs
a ceremony called <foreign rend='italic'>ai</foreign>. For example, a
man who has killed a tiger must dress
himself up as a woman, put flints into
the tiger's mouth, and eat eggs himself,
after which he makes a speech to the
tiger and gives it three cuts over the
head with a sword. During this performance
the principal performer must
keep perfectly grave. Should he
accidentally laugh, he says, <q>The
porcupine laughed,</q> referring to a
real porcupine which he carries in his
arms for the purpose. See Lieut.-Colonel
J. Shakespeare, <q>The Kuki-Lushai
Clans,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxix. (1909)
pp. 380 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This
hypothesis is strongly confirmed by the reason alleged for
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
a similar custom formerly observed by the Maoris. When
a warrior had slain his foe in combat, he tasted his blood,
believing that this preserved him from the avenging spirit
of his victim; for they imagined that <q>the moment a slayer
had tasted the blood of the slain, the dead man became a
part of his being and placed him under the protection of
the <foreign rend='italic'>atua</foreign> or guardian-spirit of the deceased.</q><note place='foot'>J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
autour du Monde et à la recherche de
la Pérouse</hi> (Paris, 1832-1833), iii.
305.</note> In the light
of these facts we can now explain the opinion, still widely
held in Calabria, that if a murderer is to escape, he must
suck his victim's blood from the reeking blade of the dagger
with which he did the deed;<note place='foot'>Vincenzo Dorsa, <hi rend='italic'>La Tradizione
greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze
popolari della Calabria Citeriore</hi>
(Cosenza, 1884), p. 138.</note> and, further, we can see at
least a glimmering of reason, however misapplied, in the
confidence cherished by the Botocudos of Brazil, that if
only they ate a morsel of the flesh of their enemies, the
arrows of the fellow tribesmen of the slain would not be
able to hit them.<note place='foot'>F. de Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition dans
les parties centrales de l'Amérique du
Sud</hi> (Paris, 1850-1851), iv. 382.</note> Indeed the evidence which I have just
adduced suggests that the intention of forming a blood-covenant
with the dead may have been a common motive
for the cannibalism which has been so often practised
by savage victors on the bodies of their victims.<note place='foot'>Some of the evidence has already
been cited by me in <hi rend='italic'>Psyche's Task</hi>, pp.
56-58.</note> If
that was so, it would to some extent mitigate the
horror with which such a practice is naturally viewed by
civilised observers; since it would reveal the cannibal
feast, no longer in the lurid light of a brutal outburst
of blind rage and hatred against the vanquished, but in
the milder aspect of a solemn rite designed to wipe out
the memory of past hostilities and to establish a permanent
relation of friendship and good fellowship with the
dead.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Communion
with the
dead by
swallowing
their ashes.</note>
Another mode of entering into communion with the
dead by means of their bodily relics is to grind their bones
to powder or to burn them to ashes, and then to swallow
the powder or the ashes mixed with food or drink. This
method of absorbing the virtues or appropriating the souls
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
of deceased kinsfolk has been practised by a number of
Indian tribes of South America. Thus the Tarianas,
Tucanos, and other tribes in the valley of the Amazon,
about a month after the funeral, disinter the corpse, which
is then much decomposed, and put it in a great pan or oven
over the fire till all the volatile parts are driven off with a
most horrible stench, leaving only a black carbonaceous
paste. This paste is then pounded into a fine powder, and
being mixed in several large vats of the native beer, the
liquor is drunk by the assembled company until all is
consumed. They believe that thus the virtues of the deceased
are transmitted to the drinkers.<note place='foot'>A. R. Wallace, <hi rend='italic'>Travels on the
Amazon and Rio Negro</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1889), ch. xvii.
pp. 346 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly among
the Xomanas and Passes of the Rio Negro and Japura
River in Brazil, it was customary to burn the bones of the
dead and mingle the ashes in their drink; <q>for they fancied,
that by this means they received into their own bodies the
spirits of their deceased friends.</q><note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>,
iii. (London, 1819) p. 722.</note> We may suppose that
a similar motive underlies the custom wherever it has been
observed by the Indians of South America, even when this
particular motive is not expressly alleged by our authorities.
For example, the Retoroños, Pechuyos, and Guarayos of
eastern Bolivia <q>manifested their feeling for the dead by a
remarkable custom: when the body had mouldered they
dug up the bones, reduced them to powder, and mingling it
with maize, composed a sort of cake, which they considered
it the strongest mark of friendship to offer and partake.
Some of the first missionaries were regaled with this family
bread, before they knew what they were eating.</q><note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 204.</note> Again,
in the province of Coro, in north-western Venezuela, when
a chief died, they lamented him in the night, celebrating his
actions; then they parched his body at the fire, and reducing
it to powder drank it up in their liquor, deeming this
act the highest honour they could pay him.<note place='foot'>A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>The General
History of the Vast Continent and
Islands of America</hi>, translated by Capt.
John Stevens (London, 1725-1726),
iv. 45.</note> The Tauaré
Indians of the Rio Enivra burn their dead, keep their ashes
in hollow reeds, and eat a portion of the ashes with every
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
meal.<note place='foot'>A. Reich und F. Stegelmann,
<q>Bei den Indianern des Urubamba
und des Envira,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxxiii.
(1903) p. 137. On similar custom
practised by the American Indians see
further De la Borde, <hi rend='italic'>Relation de
l'Origine, Mœurs, Coustumes, Religion,
Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes
Sauvages</hi>, p. 37 (forming part of the
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil de divers Voyages faits en
Afrique et en l'Amerique</hi>, Paris, 1684);
J. F. Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des Sauvages
Ameriquains</hi> (Paris, 1724), ii. 444-446;
A. N. Cabeça de Vaca, <hi rend='italic'>Relation et
Naufrages</hi> (Paris, 1837), p. 109 (in
Ternaux Compans' <hi rend='italic'>Voyages, Relations
et Mémoires originaux pour servir à
l'Histoire de la Découverte de l'Amérique</hi>);
R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>,
i. (Second Edition, London, 1822),
Supplemental Notes, p. xxxvi.; F. de
Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition dans les parties
centrales de l'Amérique du Sud</hi> (Paris,
1850-1851), iv. 380; J. G. Müller,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen</hi>
(Bâle, 1867), pp. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. A. Coudreau, <hi rend='italic'>La France Équinoxiale</hi>
(Paris, 1887), ii. 173; Theodor
Koch, <q>Die Anthropophagie der
südamerikanischen Indianer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
xii. (1899) pp. 78-110; Th. Koch-Grünberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre unter den
Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910), ii.
152. Some Indians of Guiana rubbed
their limbs with water in which the
ashes of their dead were mingled. See
A. Biet, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage de la France Equinoxiale
en l'Isle de Cayenne</hi> (Paris,
1664), p. 392.</note> So in antiquity Artemisia expressed her love and
grief for her dead husband Mausolus by powdering his ashes
and drinking them in water.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, <hi rend='italic'>Noctes Atticae</hi>, x.
18; Valerius Maximus, iv. 6. 5.</note> It is said that Mwamba, a
recent king or chief of the Wemba in Northern Rhodesia,
having detected one of his wives in an intrigue with another
man, caused the guilty pair to be burned alive, while he
watched their tortures from a raised seat. <q>Shortly after
this, however, he would seem to have been stricken with
remorse and the dread of Nemesis. The presiding witch-doctor
was therefore ordered to collect the ashes of the
twain, and decoct therefrom a potion, which was administered
to the king to avert the avenging furies of evil
spirits of the murdered pair, which might otherwise have
hounded him into a fit of madness.</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 55.</note> By drinking the ashes
of his victims the king sought to identify himself with them
and so to protect himself against their angry ghosts, just as
we have seen that manslayers seek to protect themselves
against the ghosts of their victims by drinking their blood.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Savages
attempt to
inoculate
themselves
with moral
and other
virtues by
making
cuts in their
bodies and
inserting in
the cuts the
ashes of
animals
and plants
which they
suppose to
be endowed
with the
virtues in
question.</note>
Just as the savage thinks that he can swallow the
moral and other virtues in the shape of food, so he fondly
imagines that he can inoculate himself with them. Here
in Europe we as yet inoculate only against disease; in
Basutoland they have learned the art of inoculating not
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
merely against disease but against moral evil and public
calamity, against wild beasts and winter cold. For example,
if an epidemic is raging, if public affairs go ill, or war
threatens to break out, the chief, with paternal solicitude,
seeks to guard his people against the evils that menace
them by inoculating them with his own hand. Armed
with a lancet, he makes a slight incision in the temples of
each one, and rubs into the wound a pinch of magic
powder which has been carefully compounded of the ashes
of certain plants and animals. The plants and animals
whose ashes compose this sovereign medicine are always
symbolical; in other words, they are supposed to be imbued
with the virtues which the chief desires to impart to his
people. They consist, for example, of plants whose foliage
withstands the rigours of winter; mimosas, whose thorns
present an impenetrable barrier to all animals of the deer
kind; the claws or a few hairs from the mane of a lion, the
bravest of beasts; the tuft of hair round the root of the
horns of a bull, which is the emblem of strength and
fecundity; the skin of a serpent; the feathers of a kite or
a hawk.<note place='foot'>Rev. E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>,
(London, 1861), pp. 256 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So when the Barotsé wish to be swift of foot,
to cripple the fleeing game, and to ensure an abundant
catch, they scarify their arms and legs and rub into the
wounds a powder made of the burnt bones of various
beasts and birds.<note place='foot'>E. Holub, <hi rend='italic'>Sieben Jahre in Süd
Afrika</hi> (Vienna, 1881), ii. 361.</note> Among some tribes of South-Eastern
Africa the same magic powder which is made from various
parts of slain foes, and is eaten by boys at circumcision,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>.</note> is
used to inoculate the fighting-men in time of war. The
medicine-man makes an incision in the forehead of each
warrior, and puts the powder into the cut, thus infusing
strength and courage for the battle.<note place='foot'>J. Macdonald, <q>Manners, Customs,
etc., of South African Tribes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xx. (1891) p. 133. The Barolong,
a Bechuana tribe, observe a custom
of this sort. See W. Joest, <q>Bei
den Barolong,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Das Ausland</hi>, 16th
June 1884, p. 464.</note> Among some Caffre
tribes the powdered charcoal with which the warriors are
thus inoculated in various parts of their bodies is procured
by burning the flesh of a live ox with a certain kind of
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
wood or roots, to which magic virtue is attributed.<note place='foot'>Col. Maclean, <hi rend='italic'>A Compendium of
Kafir Laws and Customs</hi> (Cape Town,
1866), p. 82.</note> The
Basutos think that they can render themselves invulnerable
by inoculation,<note place='foot'>Father Porte, <q>Les reminiscences
d'un missionnaire du Basutoland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les
Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxviii. (1896)
p. 149.</note> and the Zulus imagine that they can
protect themselves against snake-bite by similar means.
But the saving virtue of the inoculation is not permanent;
like vaccination, it has to be periodically renewed. Hence
every year, about October, Zulu men, women, and children
have a small piece of skin cut from the back of the left
hand, and the poison of a snake, mixed with spittle, is
rubbed into the wound. No snake will ever approach a
man who has thus been inoculated; and what is even more
curious, if the shadow of an inoculated man should touch
the shadow of a man who has not been inoculated, the
latter will fall down as if he had been shot, overcome by
the poison transmitted through the shadow: so exceedingly
virulent is the virus.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>
(London, 1906), p. 70, compare p.
43.</note> Among the Jukos, a tribe of the Benue
River in Northern Nigeria, before a hunter goes forth to
hunt elephants, he makes four cuts in his left arm and rubs
in <q>medicine</q>; this helps him to see the beast next day.<note place='foot'>Lieut. H. Pope-Hennessy, <q>Notes
on the Jukos and other Tribes of
the Middle Benue,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropological
Reviews and Miscellanea</hi>, p. (30); appended
to <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxx. (1900).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Zulus
think they
can inoculate
themselves
with
celestial
power. Some
Caffres
inoculate
themselves
against
lightning.</note>
Again, the Zulus know how to inoculate themselves not
merely with moral virtue, but even with celestial power.
For you must know that the Zulus have heaven-herds or
sky-herds, who drive away clouds big with hail and lightning,
just as herdsmen drive cattle before them. These heaven-herds
are in sympathy with the heaven. For when the
heaven is about to be darkened, and before the clouds
appear or the thunder mutters, the heart of the heaven-herd
feels it coming, for it is hot within him and he is excited
by anger. When the sky begins to be overcast, he too
grows dark like it; when it thunders, he frowns, that his
face may be black as the scowl of the angry heaven. Now
the way in which he thus becomes sympathetic with all
the changing moods of the inconstant heaven is this: he
eats the heaven and scarifies himself with it. And the way
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
in which he eats the heaven and scarifies himself with it is
as follows. When a bullock is struck by lightning, the
wizard takes its flesh and puts it in a sherd and eats it while
it is hot, mixed with medicine; and thus he eats the heaven
by eating the flesh, which came from the beast, which was
struck by the lightning, which came down from the heaven.
And in like manner he scarifies himself with the heaven,
for he makes cuts in his body and rubs in medicine mixed
with the flesh of a bullock that was struck by lightning.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious
System of the Amazulu</hi>, pp. 380-382.</note>
In some Caffre tribes, when an animal or a man has been
struck by lightning, the priest comes straightway and
vaccinates every person in the kraal, apparently as a sort
of insurance against lightning. He sets to work by tying
a number of charms round the neck of every man and
woman in the village, in order that they may have power
to dig the dead man's grave; for in these tribes beasts
and men alike that have been struck by lightning are always
buried, and the flesh is never eaten. Next a sacrificial beast
is killed and a fire kindled, in which certain magic woods
or roots are burned to charcoal, and then ground to powder.
The priest thereupon makes incisions in various parts of the
bodies of each inmate of the kraal, and rubs a portion of the
powdered charcoal into the cuts; the rest of the powder he
mixes with sour milk, and gives to them all to drink. From
the time the lightning strikes the kraal until this ceremony
has been performed, the people are obliged to abstain
entirely from the use of milk. Their heads are then shaved.
Should a house have been struck by lightning it must be
abandoned, with everything in it. Until all these rites
have been performed, none of the people may leave the
kraal or have any intercourse whatever with others; but
when the ceremonies have been duly performed, the people are
pronounced clean, and may again associate with their neighbours.
However, for some months afterwards none of the livestock
of the kraal and few other things belonging to it are
allowed to pass into other hands, whether by way of sale
or of gift.<note place='foot'>Col. Maclean, <hi rend='italic'>A Compendium of
Kafir Laws and Customs</hi> (Cape Town,
1866), pp. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Hence it would appear that all persons in a
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
village which has been struck by lightning are supposed to
be infected with a dangerous virus, which they might communicate
to their neighbours; and the vaccination is
intended to disinfect them as well as to protect them
against the recurrence of a like calamity. Young Carib
warriors used to be inoculated for the purpose of making
them brave and hardy. Some time before the ceremony
the lad who was to be operated on caught a bird of prey
of a particular sort and kept it in captivity till the day
appointed. When the time was come and friends had
assembled to witness the ceremony, the father of the boy
seized the bird by its legs and crushed its head by beating
it on the head of his son, who dared not wince under the
rain of blows that nearly stunned him. Next the father
bruised and pounded the bird's flesh, and steeped it in water
together with a certain spice; after which he scored and
slashed his son's body in all directions, washed his
wounds with the decoction, and gave him the bird's heart
to eat, in order, as it was said, that he might be the
braver for it.<note place='foot'>Du Tertre, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire generale des
Isles de S. Christophe, de la Guadeloupe,
de la Martinique et autres dans
l'Amerique</hi> (Paris, 1654), pp. 417 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire generale des Antilles</hi>
(Paris, 1667-1671), ii. 377; Rochefort,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire Naturelle et Morale des
Iles Antilles</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Rotterdam, 1665), p.
556.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Some
savages
attempt to
acquire the
physical
and mental
qualities of
the dead by
anointing
themselves
with their
remains. The juices
of animals
are sometimes
similarly
applied for
the same
purpose.</note>
It is not always deemed necessary either that the
mystical substance should be swallowed by the communicant,
or that he should receive it by the more painful
process of scarification and inoculation. Sometimes it is
thought enough merely to smear or anoint him with it.
Among some of the Australian blacks it used to be a
common practice to kill a man, cut out his caul-fat, and
rub themselves with it, in the belief that all the qualities,
both physical and mental, which had distinguished the
original owner of the fat, were thus communicated by its
means to the person who greased himself with it.<note place='foot'>R. Brough Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi> (Melbourne and London,
1878), i. p. xxix., ii. 313; A. W.
Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi> (London, 1904), pp. 367 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The
Kamilaroi tribe of New South Wales sometimes deposited
their dead on the forks of trees, and lighting fires underneath
caught the fat as it dropped; for they hoped with
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
the droppings to acquire the strength and courage of the
deceased.<note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ridley, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi>
(Sydney, 1875), p. 160.</note> The Wollaroi, another tribe of New South
Wales, used to place the dead on a stage, and the mourners
sat under it and rubbed their bodies with the juices of
putrefaction which exuded from the rotten body, believing
that this made them strong. Others collected these
juices in vessels, and the young men rubbed the stinking
liquid into their persons in order to acquire the good
qualities of the departed.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
pp. 467, 468.</note> Wherever a like custom has
been practised, as it has been, for example, by some of the
natives of New Guinea, Timor Laut, and Madagascar,<note place='foot'>J. Chalmers and W. W. Gill,
<hi rend='italic'>Work and Adventure in New Guinea</hi>
(London, 1885), pp. 130, 265, 308;
J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik- en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi> (The
Hague, 1886), p. 308; Rev. J.
Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African Island</hi>
(London, 1880), p. 241. Other or
the same peoples sometimes drink the
juices of the decaying bodies of their
kinsfolk, doubtless for a similar reason.
See <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>,
vi. (Cambridge, 1906) p. 159; J.
Chalmers and W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 27,
265; Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
United States Exploring Expedition</hi>,
New Edition (New York, 1851), ii.
139; J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 267;
A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>, ii. (Berlin,
1885) p. 95; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des
Ostlichen Asien</hi>, v. (Jena, 1869) p. 91;
P. J. Veth, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo's Westerafdeeling</hi>
(Zaltbommel, 1854-1856), ii. 270; J.
Jacobs, <hi rend='italic'>Eenigen Tijd onder de Baliers</hi>
(Batavia, 1883), p. 53.</note> we
may conjecture that the motive has been similar. Again,
the negroes of Southern Guinea regard the brain as the
seat of wisdom, and think it a pity that, when a wise man
dies, his brain and his wisdom should go to waste together.
So they sever his head from his body and hang it up over
a mass of chalk, which, as the head decays, receives the
drippings of brain and wisdom. Any one who applies the
precious dripping to his forehead is supposed to absorb
thereby the intelligence of the dead.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 394.</note> Among the Beku, a
tribe of dwarfs attached to the Fans in West Africa, the
great charm for success in hunting is procured by killing a
man and afterwards, when the corpse has begun to moulder
in the grave, detaching the head from the body. The brain,
heart, eyes and hairs of the body are then removed and
mixed, according to a secret formula, with special incantations.
When the compound is dry, the hunter rubs himself
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
with it <q>in order to acquire a dash of the higher power with
which people are endowed in the other life, and in particular
their invisibility.</q><note place='foot'>Mgr. Le Roy, <q>Les Pygmées,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxix. (1897)
p. 210.</note> Among the Digger Indians of California,
when a man died, it was customary to burn the body to
ashes, mix the ashes with a thick resinous gum extracted
from a pine-tree, and then smear the gum on the head of
the mourner, where it was allowed to remain till it gradually
wore away.<note place='foot'><q>Mourning for the Dead among
the Digger Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, iii. (1874)
p. 530.</note> The motive for the custom is not mentioned,
but it was probably, like the motive for the parallel custom
of swallowing the ashes of the dead, a desire to participate
in the powers and virtues of the departed. At a certain
stage of the ceremonies by which, in the Andaman Islands,
a boy is initiated into manhood, the chief takes the carcase
of a boar and presses it heavily down on the shoulders,
back, and limbs of the young man as he sits, silent and
motionless, on the ground. This is done to make him
brave and strong. Afterwards the animal is cut up, and its
melted fat is poured over the novice, and rubbed into his
body.<note place='foot'>E. H. Man, <hi rend='italic'>Aboriginal Inhabitants
of the Andaman Islands</hi>, p. 66.</note> The Arabs of Eastern Africa believe that an
unguent of lion's fat inspires a man with boldness, and
makes the wild beasts flee in terror before him.<note place='foot'>Jerome Becker, <hi rend='italic'>La Vie en Afrique</hi>
(Paris and Brussels, 1887), ii.
366.</note> In the
forests of North-western Brazil there lives a small falcon
with a red beak which is so sharp-sighted that it can detect
even a worm on the ground from a considerable height.
When a Kobeua Indian has killed one of these birds, he
pokes out its eyes and allows the fluid to drip into
his own, believing that in this way they will be
sharp-sighted like those of the falcon.<note place='foot'>Th. Koch-Grünberg, <hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre
unter den Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910),
ii. 153.</note> Most of the
Baperis, or Malekootoos, a Bechuana tribe of South Africa,
revere or, as they say, sing the porcupine, which seems
to be their totem, as the sun is the totem of some
members of the tribe, and a species of ape the totem of
others. Those of them who have the porcupine for their
totem swear by the animal, and lament if any one injures it.
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
When a porcupine has been killed, they religiously gather
up its bristles, spit on them, and rub their eyebrows with
them, saying, <q>They have slain our brother, our master, one
of ourselves, him whom we sing.</q> They would fear to die
if they ate of its flesh. Nevertheless they esteem it wholesome
for an infant of the clan to rub into his joints certain
portions of the paunch of the animal mixed with the sap
of some plants to which they ascribe an occult virtue.<note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage d'Exploration au Nord-est de
la Colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi>
(Paris, 1842), pp. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So
at the solemn ceremony which is observed by the Central
Australian tribes for the purpose of multiplying kangaroos,
men of the kangaroo totem not only eat a little kangaroo
flesh as a sacrament, but also have their bodies anointed
with kangaroo fat. Doubtless the intention alike of the
eating and of the anointing is to impart to the man the
qualities of his totem animal, and thus to enable him
to perform the ceremonies for the multiplication of the
breed.<note place='foot'>Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes
of Central Australia</hi> (London, 1899),
pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Men of other totem clans
also partake of their totems sacramentally
at these <foreign rend='italic'>Intichiuma</foreign> ceremonies
(Spencer and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 202-206).
As to the <hi rend='italic'>Intichiuma</hi> ceremonies,
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Another
Central Australian mode of communicating
qualities by external application
is seen in the custom of beating
boys on the calves of their legs with
the leg-bone of an eagle-hawk; strength
is supposed to pass thereby from the
bone into the boy's leg. See Spencer
and Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 472; <hi rend='italic'>Report on
the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition
to Central Australia</hi>, Part iv.
(London and Melbourne, 1896), p. 180.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Magical
ointment
used by
Mexican
priests.</note>
In ancient Mexico the priests of the god Tezcatlipoca,
before they engaged in religious rites which tried the nerve,
used to smear their bodies with a magic ointment, which
had the effect of banishing all fear, so that they would
confront wild beasts in their dens or slaughter people in
sacrifice with the utmost indifference. The ointment which
had this marvellous property was compounded of the
ashes of venomous reptiles and insects, such as spiders,
scorpions, centipedes, and vipers, which were brayed up in a
mortar along with living specimens of the same creatures,
tobacco, soot, and the ashes of black caterpillars. This
precious substance was then set before the god in little pots,
because they said it was his victuals; therefore they called it
a divine food. And when the priests had besmeared themselves
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
with it, they were ready to discharge the duties of their
holy office by butchering their fellow men in the human
shambles without one qualm of fear or one visiting of compassion.
Moreover, an unction of this ointment was deemed
a sovereign remedy for sickness and disease; hence they
named it <q>the divine physic</q>; and sick people came from
all quarters to the priests, as to their saviours, to have their
ailing parts anointed with the divine physic and to be made
whole.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de
l'Origine des Indiens qui habitent la
Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions</hi>,
publié par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903),
pp. 171-173; J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural
and Moral History of the Indies</hi> (Hakluyt
Society, London, 1880), ii. 364-367;
E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Altmexikanische
Studien</hi>, ii. (Berlin, 1899), pp. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen aus dem königlichen
Museum für Völkerkunde</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Qualities of
a person,
animal, or
thing imparted
by
fumigation.</note>
Sometimes the valuable qualities of an animal or of a
person may be imparted to another by the more delicate and
ethereal process of fumigation. This refined mode of cultivating
the moral virtues is or used to be practised by the
Caffres of South Africa. Thus in former times as soon as a
baby was born, some dirt was scraped from the forearm and
other parts of the father's body and mixed with special
medicines. The mixture was then made to smoulder and
the baby was fumigated or <q>washed</q> in the smoke. This
ceremony was deemed of great importance, being the established
way of communicating to the child a portion of the
ancestral spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>itongo</foreign>) through the physical medium of the
father's dirt, to which the spirit naturally adheres. But
while the dirt was endowed with this spiritual potency, the
moral character of the infant depended in a large measure
on the nature of the medicines with which the dirt was
compounded, and accordingly much thought and skill were
devoted to their selection and preparation. Foremost among
the ingredients was a meteorite, burnt to a cinder and ground
to powder. The effect of this powder, well mixed with the
dirt, and introduced into the orifices of the child's body
by means of smoke, is to close the anterior fontanelle of
the baby's skull, to strengthen the bones of that important
part of his person, to communicate vigour to his mind and
courage to his disposition, and in general to brace and harden
his whole system with the strength and hardness of the
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
meteorite. Other ingredients which have a most beneficial
effect are the powdered whiskers of a leopard, the claws of a
lion, and the skin of a salamander. The mode of administering
the medicine is as follows. You set fire to the compound,
and while it smoulders, you hold the infant, wrapt
up in a blanket, over the burning mass so as to compel it to
inhale the smoke. To make sure of producing the desired
effect, some of the powdered medicine is mixed with the baby's
food.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>
(London, 1906), pp. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In like manner by holding the smouldering feather
of a vulture under a baby's nose you render the child valiant
and brave like a vulture, and if you do the same with a
peacock's feather, your offspring will be, like a peacock,
impavid and never dismayed by thunder or other terrible
noises.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The savage
custom of
eating a
god.
Cicero on
transubstantiation.</note>
It is now easy to understand why a savage should desire
to partake of the flesh of an animal or man whom he regards
as divine. By eating the body of the god he shares in the
god's attributes and powers. And when the god is a corn-god,
the corn is his proper body; when he is a vine-god, the
juice of the grape is his blood; and so by eating the bread
and drinking the wine the worshipper partakes of the real
body and blood of his god. Thus the drinking of wine in
the rites of a vine-god like Dionysus is not an act of revelry,
it is a solemn sacrament.<note place='foot'>On the custom of eating a god, see
also a paper by Felix Liebrecht, <q>Der
aufgegessene Gott,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>
(Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 436-439; and
especially W. R. Smith, article <q>Sacrifice,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Britannica</hi>, Ninth
Edition, vol. xxi. pp. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On wine
as the blood of a god, see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and
the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Yet a time comes when reasonable
men find it hard to understand how any one in his senses
can suppose that by eating bread or drinking wine he consumes
the body or blood of a deity. <q>When we call corn
Ceres and wine Bacchus,</q> says Cicero, <q>we use a common
figure of speech; but do you imagine that anybody is so
insane as to believe that the thing he feeds upon is a
god?</q><note place='foot'>Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De natura deorum</hi>, iii. 16.
41.</note> In writing thus the Roman philosopher little foresaw
that in Rome itself, and in the countries which have derived
their creed from her, the belief which he here stigmatises
as insane was destined to persist for thousands of years,
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
as a cardinal doctrine of religion, among peoples who pride
themselves on their religious enlightenment by comparison
with the blind superstitions of pagan antiquity. So little
can even the greatest minds of one generation foresee the
devious track which the religious faith of mankind will
pursue in after ages.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII. Killing The Divine Animal.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Killing the Sacred Buzzard.'/>
<head>§ 1. Killing the Sacred Buzzard.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hunting
and pastoral
tribes,
as well as
agricultural
peoples,
have been
in the habit
of killing
and eating
the beings
whom they
worship.
The Californian
Indians
used
solemnly
to kill the
great
buzzard
which they
adored;
but they
believed
that though
they slew it
annually,
it always
came to
life again.</note>
In the preceding chapters we saw that many communities
which have progressed so far as to subsist mainly by
agriculture have been in the habit of killing and eating
their farinaceous deities either in their proper form of
corn, rice, and so forth, or in the borrowed shapes of
animals and men. It remains to shew that hunting and
pastoral tribes, as well as agricultural peoples, have been
in the habit of killing the beings whom they worship.
Among the worshipful beings or gods, if indeed they
deserve to be dignified by that name, whom hunters and
shepherds adore and kill are animals pure and simple, not
animals regarded as embodiments of other supernatural
beings. Our first example is drawn from the Indians of
California, who living in a fertile country<note place='foot'>This does not refer to the Californian
peninsula, which is an arid
and treeless wilderness of rock and
sand.</note> under a serene and
temperate sky, nevertheless rank near the bottom of the
savage scale. Where a stretch of iron-bound coast breaks
the long line of level sands that receive the rollers of the
Pacific, there stood in former days, not far from the brink of
the great cliffs, the white mission-house of San Juan Capistrano.
Among the monks who here exercised over a handful
of wretched Indians the austere discipline of Catholic
Spain, there was a certain Father Geronimo Boscana who
has bequeathed to us a precious record of the customs and
superstitions of his savage flock. Thus he tells us that the
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
Acagchemem tribe adored the great buzzard, and that once a
year they celebrated a great festival called <foreign rend='italic'>Panes</foreign> or bird-feast
in its honour. The day selected for the festival was made
known to the public on the evening before its celebration and
preparations were at once made for the erection of a special
temple (<foreign rend='italic'>vanquech</foreign>), which seems to have been a circular or
oval enclosure of stakes with the stuffed skin of a coyote
or prairie-wolf set up on a hurdle to represent the god
Chinigchinich. When the temple was ready, the bird was
carried into it in solemn procession and laid on an altar
erected for the purpose. Then all the young women,
whether married or single, began to run to and fro, as if
distracted, some in one direction and some in another, while
the elders of both sexes remained silent spectators of the
scene, and the captains, tricked out in paint and feathers,
danced round their adored bird. These ceremonies being
concluded, they seized upon the bird and carried it to the
principal temple, all the assembly uniting in the grand display,
and the captains dancing and singing at the head of
the procession. Arrived at the temple, they killed the bird
without losing a drop of its blood. The skin was removed
entire and preserved with the feathers as a relic or for
the purpose of making the festal garment or <foreign rend='italic'>paelt</foreign>. The
carcase was buried in a hole in the temple, and the old
women gathered round the grave weeping and moaning
bitterly, while they threw various kinds of seeds or pieces of
food on it, crying out, <q>Why did you run away? Would
you not have been better with us? you would have made
<foreign rend='italic'>pinole</foreign> (a kind of gruel) as we do, and if you had not run
away, you would not have become a <foreign rend='italic'>Panes</foreign>,</q> and so on.
When this ceremony was concluded, the dancing was
resumed and kept up for three days and nights. They
said that the <foreign rend='italic'>Panes</foreign> was a woman who had run off to
the mountains and there been changed into a bird by
the god Chinigchinich. They believed that though they
sacrificed the bird annually, she came to life again and
returned to her home in the mountains. Moreover they
thought that <q>as often as the bird was killed, it became
multiplied; because every year all the different Capitanes
celebrated the same feast of <foreign rend='italic'>Panes</foreign>, and were firm in the
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
opinion that the birds sacrificed were but one and the same
female.</q><note place='foot'><p>Father Geronimo Boscana, <q>Chinigchinich;
a historical account of the
origin, customs, and traditions of the
Indians at the missionary establishment
of St. Juan Capistrano, Alta California,</q>
appended to Alfred Robinson's
<hi rend='italic'>Life in California</hi> (New York, 1846),
pp. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Races of the Pacific States</hi>, iii. 168.
The mission station of San Juan Capistrano
is described by R. H. Dana
(<hi rend='italic'>Two Years before the Mast</hi>, chaps.
xviii. and xxiv.). A favourable picture
of the missions is drawn by H. von
Langsdorf (<hi rend='italic'>Reise um die Welt</hi>, Frankfort,
1812, ii. pp. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), by Duflos
de Mofras (<q>Fragment d'un Voyage
en Californie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie</hi> (Paris), ii. Série, xix.
(1843) pp. 9-13), and by a writer
(H. H.) in <hi rend='italic'>The Century Magazine</hi>,
May, 1883, pp. 2-18. But the severe
discipline of the Spanish monks is
noticed by other travellers. We are
told that the Indians laboured during
the day in the fields to support their
Spanish masters, were driven to church
twice or thrice a day to hear service in
a language which they did not understand,
and at night were shut up in
crowded and comfortless barracks,
without windows and without beds.
When the monks desired to make new
proselytes, or rather to capture new
slaves, they called in the aid of the
soldiery, who attacked the Indian
villages by night, lassoed the fugitives,
and dragged them back at their horses'
tails to slavery in the missions. See
O. von Kotzebue, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um die Welt</hi>
(Weimar, 1830), ii. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. W.
Beechey, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of a Voyage to the
Pacific and Beering's Strait</hi> (London,
1831), ii. chap. i.; A. Schabelski,
<q>Voyage aux colonies russes de
l'Amérique,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société
de Géographie</hi> (Paris), ii. Série, iv.
(1835) pp. 216-218. A poet has described
with prosaic accuracy the pastoral
crook by which these good shepherds
brought back their strayed lambs to the
spiritual fold:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Six horses sprang across the level ground<lb/>
As six dragoons in open order dashed;<lb/>
Above their heads the lassos circled round,<lb/>
In every eye a pious fervour flashed;<lb/>
They charged the camp, and in one moment more<lb/>
They lassoed six and reconverted four.</hi></q>
</p>
<p>
(Bret Harte, <hi rend='italic'>Friar Pedro's Ride</hi>.)
</p>
<p>
In the verses inscribed <hi rend='italic'>The Angelus,
heard at the Mission Dolores</hi>, 1868,
and beginning
</p>
<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Bells of the Past, whose long-forgotten music<lb/>
Still fills the wide expanse</hi>,</q>
</p>
<p>
the same poet shews that he is not
insensible to the poetical side of those
old Spanish missions, which have long
passed away.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Perhaps
they hoped
by the
sacrifice
of the
individual
bird to
preserve
the species.</note>
The unity in multiplicity thus postulated by the Californians
is very noticeable and helps to explain their motive
for killing the divine bird. The notion of the life of a species
as distinct from that of an individual, easy and obvious as it
seems to us, appears to be one which the Californian savage
cannot grasp. He is unable to conceive the life of the species
otherwise than as an individual life, and therefore as exposed
to the same dangers and calamities which menace and finally
destroy the life of the individual. Apparently he imagines
that a species left to itself will grow old and die like an
individual, and that therefore some step must be taken to
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
save from extinction the particular species which he regards
as divine. The only means he can think of to avert the
catastrophe is to kill a member of the species in whose veins
the tide of life is still running strong, and has not yet stagnated
among the fens of old age. The life thus diverted from one
channel will flow, he fancies, more freshly and freely in a
new one; in other words, the slain animal will revive and
enter on a new term of life with all the spring and energy of
youth. To us this reasoning is transparently absurd, but so
too is the custom. If a better explanation, that is, one more
consonant with the facts and with the principles of savage
thought, can be given of the custom, I will willingly withdraw
the one here proposed. A similar confusion, it may be
noted, between the individual life and the life of the species
was made by the Samoans. Each family had for its god a
particular species of animal; yet the death of one of these
animals, for example an owl, was not the death of the god,
<q>he was supposed to be yet alive, and incarnate in all the
owls in existence.</q><note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi> (London, 1884),
p. 21. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 26, 61.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Killing the Sacred Ram.'/>
<head>§ 2. Killing the Sacred Ram.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ancient
Egyptian
sacrifice of
a ram at
the festival
of Ammon.</note>
The rude Californian rite which we have just considered
has a close parallel in the religion of ancient Egypt. The
Thebans and all other Egyptians who worshipped the Theban
god Ammon held rams to be sacred, and would not sacrifice
them. But once a year at the festival of Ammon they killed
a ram, skinned it, and clothed the image of the god in the
skin. Then they mourned over the ram and buried it in a
sacred tomb. The custom was explained by a story that
Zeus had once exhibited himself to Hercules clad in the
fleece and wearing the head of a ram.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 42. The custom has
been already referred to above, p. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</note> Of course the ram
in this case was simply the beast-god of Thebes, as the wolf
was the beast-god of Lycopolis, and the goat was the beast-god
of Mendes. In other words, the ram was Ammon himself.
On the monuments, it is true, Ammon appears in
semi-human form with the body of a man and the head of a
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
ram.<note place='foot'>Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2 (Stuttgart and Berlin,
1909), p. 73 § 180. Compare Sir J.
G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1878), iii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But this only shews that he was in the usual chrysalis
state through which beast-gods regularly pass before they
emerge as full-blown anthropomorphic gods. The ram,
therefore, was killed, not as a sacrifice to Ammon, but as the
god himself, whose identity with the beast is plainly shewn
by the custom of clothing his image in the skin of the slain
ram. The reason for thus killing the ram-god annually may
have been that which I have assigned for the general custom
of killing a god and for the special Californian custom of
killing the divine buzzard. As applied to Egypt, this
explanation is supported by the analogy of the bull-god
Apis, who was not suffered to outlive a certain term of
years.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</note> The intention of thus putting a limit to the life of
the human god was, as I have argued, to secure him from
the weakness and frailty of age. The same reasoning would
explain the custom&mdash;probably an older one&mdash;of putting the
beast-god to death annually, as was done with the ram of
Thebes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
skin of the
sacrificed
animal.</note>
One point in the Theban ritual&mdash;the application of the
skin to the image of the god&mdash;deserves particular attention.
If the god was at first the living ram, his representation by an
image must have originated later. But how did it originate?
One answer to this question is perhaps furnished by the
practice of preserving the skin of the animal which is slain
as divine. The Californians, as we have seen, preserved the
skin of the buzzard; and the skin of the goat, which is killed
on the harvest-field as a representative of the corn-spirit, is
kept for various superstitious purposes.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>; vol. i. p. 285.</note> The skin in fact
was kept as a token or memorial of the god, or rather as
containing in it a part of the divine life, and it had only to
be stuffed or stretched upon a frame to become a regular
image of him. At first an image of this kind would be
renewed annually,<note place='foot'>The Italmens of Kamtchatka, at
the close of the fishing season, used to
make the figure of a wolf out of grass.
This figure they carefully kept the
whole year, believing that it wedded
with their maidens and prevented them
from giving birth to twins; for twins
were esteemed a great misfortune. See
G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von dem
Lande Kamtschatka</hi> (Frankfort and
Leipsic, 1774), pp. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According
to Chr. Hartknoch (<hi rend='italic'>Dissertat. histor. de
variis rebus Prussicis</hi>, p. 163; <hi rend='italic'>Alt-
und neues Preussen</hi>, Frankfort and
Leipsic, 1684, p. 161) the image of the
old Prussian god Curcho was annually
renewed. But see W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Korndämonen</hi> (Berlin, 1868), p. 27.</note> the new image being provided by the
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
skin of the slain animal. But from annual images to permanent
images the transition is easy. We have seen that
the older custom of cutting a new May-tree every year was
superseded by the practice of maintaining a permanent May-pole,
which was, however, annually decked with fresh leaves
and flowers, and even surmounted each year by a fresh young
tree.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly when the stuffed skin, as a representative
of the god, was replaced by a permanent image of him in
wood, stone, or metal, the permanent image was annually
clad in the fresh skin of the slain animal. When this stage
had been reached, the custom of killing the ram came
naturally to be interpreted as a sacrifice offered to the image,
and was explained by a story like that of Ammon and
Hercules.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Killing the Sacred Serpent.'/>
<head>§ 3. Killing the Sacred Serpent.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sacred
serpent of
Issapoo in
Fernando
Po.</note>
West Africa appears to furnish another example of the
annual killing of a sacred animal and the preservation of its
skin. The negroes of Issapoo, in the island of Fernando Po,
regard the cobra-capella as their guardian deity, who can do
them good or ill, bestow riches or inflict disease and death.
The skin of one of these reptiles is hung tail downwards from
a branch of the highest tree in the public square, and the
placing of it on the tree is an annual ceremony. As soon
as the ceremony is over, all children born within the past
year are carried out and their hands made to touch the tail
of the serpent's skin.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1858), pp.
196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer does not expressly
state that a serpent is killed annually,
but his statement implies it.</note> The latter custom is clearly a way of
placing the infants under the protection of the tribal god.
Similarly in Senegambia a python is expected to visit every
child of the Python clan within eight days after birth;<note place='foot'>Dr. Tautain, <q>Notes sur les croyances
et pratiques religieuses des Banmanas,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, iii.
(1885) p. 397. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, ii. 543 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and
the Psylli, a Snake clan of ancient Africa, used to expose
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
their infants to snakes in the belief that the snakes would
not harm true-born children of the clan.<note place='foot'>Varro in Priscian, x. 32, vol. i.
p. 524, ed. Keil; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
vii. 14. Pliny's statement is to be
corrected by Varro's.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Killing the Sacred Turtles.'/>
<head>§ 4. Killing the Sacred Turtles.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The killing
of sacred
turtles by
the Zuni
Indians.</note>
In the Californian, Egyptian, and Fernando Po customs
the animal slain may perhaps have been at some time or
other a totem, but this is very doubtful.<note place='foot'>When I wrote <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>
originally I said that in these three cases
<q>the animal slain probably is, or once
was, a totem.</q> But this seems to me
less probable now than it did then. In
regard to the Californian custom in
particular, there appears to be no good
evidence that within the area now
occupied by the United States totemism
was practised by any tribes to the west
of the Rocky Mountains. See H.
Hale, <hi rend='italic'>United States Exploring Expedition,
Ethnography and Philology</hi>
(Philadelphia, 1846), p. 199; George
Gibbs, in <hi rend='italic'>Contributions to North
American Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1877), i. 184; S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of
California</hi> (Washington, 1877), p. 5;
A. S. Gatschet, <hi rend='italic'>The Klamath Indians
of South-western Oregon</hi> (Washington,
1890), vol. i. p. cvi. <q>California and
Oregon seem never to have had any
gentes or phratries</q> (A. S. Gatschet in
a letter to me, dated November 5th,
1888). Beyond the very doubtful case
cited in the text, I know of no evidence
that totemism exists in Fernando
Po.</note> At all events, in
all three cases the worship of the animal seems to have no
relation to agriculture, and may therefore be presumed to date
from the hunting or pastoral stage of society. The same
may be said of the following custom, though the people who
practise it&mdash;the Zuni Indians of New Mexico&mdash;are now
settled in walled villages or towns of a peculiar type, and
practise agriculture and the arts of pottery and weaving.
But the Zuni custom is marked by certain features which
appear to place it in a somewhat different class from the
preceding cases. It may be well therefore to describe it at
full length in the words of an eye-witness.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>With midsummer the heat became intense. My brother
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> adopted Indian brother] and I sat, day after day, in the
cool under-rooms of our house,&mdash;the latter [<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>] busy with
his quaint forge and crude appliances, working Mexican
coins over into bangles, girdles, ear-rings, buttons, and what
not, for savage ornament. Though his tools were wonderfully
rude, the work he turned out by dint of combined
patience and ingenuity was remarkably beautiful. One day
as I sat watching him, a procession of fifty men went hastily
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
down the hill, and off westward over the plain. They were
solemnly led by a painted and shell-bedecked priest, and
followed by the torch-bearing Shu-lu-wit-si, or God of Fire.
After they had vanished, I asked old brother what it all
meant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>They are going,</q> said he, <q>to the city of the Ka-ka
and the home of our others.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The return
of the procession
with the
turtles.</note>
<q rend='pre'>Four days after, towards sunset, costumed and masked
in the beautiful paraphernalia of the Ka-k'ok-shi, or <q>Good
Dance,</q> they returned in file up the same pathway, each
bearing in his arms a basket filled with living, squirming
turtles, which he regarded and carried as tenderly as a
mother would her infant. Some of the wretched reptiles
were carefully wrapped in soft blankets, their heads and fore-feet
protruding,&mdash;and, mounted on the backs of the plume-bedecked
pilgrims, made ludicrous but solemn caricatures of
little children in the same position. While I was at supper
upstairs that evening, the governor's brother-in-law came in.
He was welcomed by the family as if a messenger from
heaven. He bore in his tremulous fingers one of the much
abused and rebellious turtles. Paint still adhered to his
hands and bare feet, which led me to infer that he had
formed one of the sacred embassy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>So you went to Ka-thlu-el-lon, did you?</q> I asked.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>E'e,</q> replied the weary man, in a voice husky with
long chanting, as he sank, almost exhausted, on a roll of
skins which had been placed for him, and tenderly laid the
turtle on the floor. No sooner did the creature find itself at
liberty than it made off as fast as its lame legs would take
it. Of one accord, the family forsook dish, spoon, and
drinking-cup, and grabbing from a sacred meal-bowl whole
handfuls of the contents, hurriedly followed the turtle about
the room, into dark corners, around water-jars, behind the
grinding-troughs, and out into the middle of the floor again,
praying and scattering meal on its back as they went. At
last, strange to say, it approached the foot-sore man who
had brought it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Ha!</q> he exclaimed with emotion; <q>see it comes to
me again; ah, what great favours the fathers of all grant me
this day,</q> and, passing his hand gently over the sprawling
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
animal, he inhaled from his palm deeply and long, at the
same time invoking the favour of the gods. Then he leaned
his chin upon his hand, and with large, wistful eyes regarded
his ugly captive as it sprawled about, blinking its meal-bedimmed
eyes, and clawing the smooth floor in memory
of its native element. At this juncture I ventured a
question:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Why do you not let him go, or give him some water?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Slowly the man turned his eyes toward me, an odd
mixture of pain, indignation, and pity on his face, while the
worshipful family stared at me with holy horror.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Poor younger brother!</q> he said at last, <q>know you
not how precious it is? It die? It will <emph>not</emph> die; I tell you,
it cannot die.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>But it will die if you don't feed it and give it
water.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The turtle
addressed
as a dead
relative.
The turtle
killed.</note>
<q><q>I tell you it <emph>cannot</emph> die; it will only change houses
to-morrow, and go back to the home of its brothers. Ah,
well! How should <emph>you</emph> know?</q> he mused. Turning to the
blinded turtle again: <q>Ah! my poor dear lost child or
parent, my sister or brother to have been! Who knows
which? Maybe my own great-grandfather or mother!</q>
And with this he fell to weeping most pathetically, and,
tremulous with sobs, which were echoed by the women and
children, he buried his face in his hands. Filled with
sympathy for his grief, however mistaken, I raised the turtle
to my lips and kissed its cold shell; then depositing it on
the floor, hastily left the grief-stricken family to their
sorrows. Next day, with prayers and tender beseechings,
plumes, and offerings, the poor turtle was killed, and its flesh
and bones were removed and deposited in the little river,
that it might <q>return once more to eternal life among its
comrades in the dark waters of the lake of the dead.</q> The
shell, carefully scraped and dried, was made into a dance-rattle,
and, covered by a piece of buckskin, it still hangs
from the smoke-stained rafters of my brother's house. Once
a Navajo tried to buy it for a ladle; loaded with indignant
reproaches, he was turned out of the house. Were any one
to venture the suggestion that the turtle no longer lived,
his remark would cause a flood of tears, and he would be
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
reminded that it had only <q>changed houses and gone to live
for ever in the home of <q>our lost others.</q></q></q><note place='foot'>Frank H. Cushing, <q>My Adventures
in Zuñi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Century Illustrated
Monthly Magazine</hi>, May 1883,
pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In this
custom is
expressed a
belief in the
transmigration
of
human
souls into
turtles. From a
later
account it
appears
that the
custom is
a mode of
interceding
with the
ancestral
spirits for
rain.</note>
In this custom we find expressed in the clearest way a
belief in the transmigration of human souls into the bodies
of turtles.<note place='foot'>Mr. Cushing, indeed, while he
admits that the ancestors of the Zuni
may have believed in transmigration,
says, <q>Their belief, to-day, however,
relative to the future life is spiritualistic.</q>
But the expressions in the text
seem to leave no room for doubting
that the transmigration into turtles is a
living article of Zuni faith.</note> The theory of transmigration is held by the
Moqui Indians, who belong to the same race as the Zunis.
The Moquis are divided into totem clans&mdash;the Bear clan,
Deer clan, Wolf clan, Hare clan, and so on; they believe that
the ancestors of the clans were bears, deer, wolves, hares, and
so forth; and that at death the members of each clan become
bears, deer, and so on according to the particular clan to
which they belonged.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi> (Philadelphia,
1853-1856), iv. 86. On the totem
clans of the Moquis, see J. G. Bourke,
<hi rend='italic'>Snake-Dance of the Moquis of Arizona</hi>
(London, 1884), pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 334 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Zuni are also divided into clans,
the totems of which agree closely with those of the Moquis,
and one of their totems is the turtle.<note place='foot'>For this information I am indebted
to the kindness of the late Captain J.
G. Bourke, 3rd Cavalry, U.S. Army,
author of the work mentioned in the
preceding note. In his letter Captain
Bourke gave a list of fourteen totem
clans of Zuni, which he received on the
20th of May 1881 from Pedro Dino (?),
Governor of Zuni.</note> Thus their belief in
transmigration into the turtle is probably one of the regular
articles of their totem faith.<note place='foot'>It should be observed, however,
that Mr. Cushing omits to say whether
or not the persons who performed the
ceremony described by him had the
turtle for their totem. If they had not,
the ceremony need not have had anything
to do with totemism.</note> What then is the meaning of
killing a turtle in which the soul of a kinsman is believed to
be present? Apparently the object is to keep up a communication
with the other world in which the souls of the
departed are believed to be assembled in the form of
turtles. It is a common belief that the spirits of the dead
return occasionally to their old homes; and accordingly the
unseen visitors are welcomed and feasted by the living, and
then sent upon their way.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 301-318.</note> In the Zuni ceremony the dead
are fetched home in the form of turtles, and the killing of the
turtles is the way of sending back the souls to the spirit-land.
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
Thus the general explanation given above of the
custom of killing a god seems inapplicable to the Zuni
custom, the true meaning of which is somewhat obscure.
Nor is the obscurity which hangs over the subject entirely
dissipated by a later and fuller account which we possess
of the ceremony. From it we learn that the ceremony forms
part of the elaborate ritual which these Indians observe at the
midsummer solstice for the purpose of ensuring an abundant
supply of rain for the crops. Envoys are despatched to
bring <q>their otherselves, the tortoises,</q> from the sacred lake
Kothluwalawa, to which the souls of the dead are believed
to repair. When the creatures have thus been solemnly
brought to Zuni, they are placed in a bowl of water and
dances are performed beside them by men in costume,
who personate gods and goddesses. <q>After the ceremonial
the tortoises are taken home by those who caught them and
are hung by their necks to the rafters till morning, when
they are thrown into pots of boiling water. The eggs are
considered a great delicacy. The meat is seldom touched
except as a medicine, which is curative for cutaneous
diseases. Part of the meat is deposited in the river with
<foreign rend='italic'>kóhakwa</foreign> (white shell beads) and turquoise beads as offerings
to Council of the Gods.</q><note place='foot'>Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson,
<q>The Zuñi Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Twenty-Third
Annual Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1904), pp.
148-162.</note> This account at all events
confirms the inference that the tortoises are supposed to be
reincarnations of the human dead, for they are called the
<q>otherselves</q> of the Zuni; indeed, what else should they be
than the souls of the dead in the bodies of tortoises seeing that
they come from the haunted lake? As the principal object
of the prayers uttered and of the dances performed at these
midsummer ceremonies appears to be to procure rain for the
crops, it may be that the intention of bringing the tortoises
to Zuni and dancing before them is to intercede with the
ancestral spirits, incarnate in the animals, that they may be
pleased to exert their power over the waters of heaven for
the benefit of their living descendants.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Killing the Sacred Bear.'/>
<head>§ 5. Killing the Sacred Bear.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ambiguous
attitude
of the Aino
towards the
bear.</note>
Doubt also hangs at first sight over the meaning of the
bear-sacrifice offered by the Aino or Ainu, a primitive people
who are found in the Japanese island of Yezo or Yesso, as
well as in Saghalien and the southern of the Kurile Islands.
It is not quite easy to define the attitude of the Aino
towards the bear. On the one hand they give it the name
of <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kamui</foreign> or <q>god</q>; but as they apply the same word to
strangers,<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Der Baerencultus
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
der deutschen Gesellschaft
b. S. und S. Ostasiens</hi> (Yokohama),
Heft xxii. p. 45.</note> it may mean no more than a being supposed
to be endowed with superhuman, or at all events extraordinary,
powers.<note place='foot'>We are told that the Aino have gods
for almost every conceivable object, and
that the word <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kamui</foreign> <q>has various
shades of meaning, which vary if used
before or after another word, and
according to the object to which it is
applied.</q> <q>When the term <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kamui</foreign> is
applied to good objects, it expresses the
quality of usefulness, beneficence, or of
being exalted or divine. When applied
to supposed evil gods, it indicates that
which is most to be feared and dreaded.
When applied to devils, reptiles, and
evil diseases, it signifies what is most
hateful, abominable, and repulsive.
When applied as a prefix to animals,
fish or fowl, it represents the greatest
or fiercest, or the most useful for food
or clothing. When applied to persons,
it is sometimes expressive of goodness,
but more often is a mere title of respect
and reverence.</q> See the Rev. J.
Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu of Japan</hi> (London,
1892), pp. 245-251; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Ainu and their Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1901), pp. 581 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Thus the Aino
<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kamui</foreign> appears to mean nearly the same
as the Dacotan <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>wakan</foreign>, as to which see
<hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>, p. 225,
note.</note> Again, it is said that <q>the bear is their
chief divinity</q>;<note place='foot'>W. Martin Wood, <q>The Hairy
Men of Yesso,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, N.S.,
iv. (1866) p. 36.</note> <q>in the religion of the Aino the bear
plays a chief part</q>;<note place='foot'>J. J. Rein, <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi> (Leipsic, 1881-1886),
i. 446.</note> <q>amongst the animals it is especially
the bear which receives an idolatrous veneration</q>;<note place='foot'>H. von Siebold, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnologische Studien
über die Aino auf der Insel Yesso</hi>
(Berlin, 1881), p. 26.</note> <q>they
worship it after their fashion</q>; <q>there is no doubt that this
wild beast inspires more of the feeling which prompts
worship than the inanimate forces of nature, and the Aino
may be distinguished as bear-worshippers.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Isabella L. Bird, <hi rend='italic'>Unbeaten
Tracks in Japan</hi> (new edition, 1885),
p. 275.</note> Yet, on the
other hand, they kill the bear whenever they can;<note place='foot'>W. Martin Wood, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> <q>in
bygone years the Ainu considered bear-hunting the most
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
manly and useful way in which a person could possibly
spend his time</q>;<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, p. 471.</note> <q>the men spend the autumn, winter, and
spring in hunting deer and bears. Part of their tribute or
taxes is paid in skins, and they subsist on the dried meat</q>;<note place='foot'>Miss I. L. Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 269.</note>
bear's flesh is indeed one of their staple foods; they eat it
both fresh and salted;<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 4 (reprinted
from <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen d. deutsch.
Gesell. b. S. und S. Ostasiens</hi>,
Yokohama).</note> and the skins of bears furnish
them with clothing.<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Baerencultus,</q> etc.,
p. 45; W. Joest, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>,
1882, p. 188.</note> In fact, the worship of which writers
on this subject speak appears to be paid chiefly to the
dead animal. Thus, although they kill a bear whenever
they can, <q>in the process of dissecting the carcass they
endeavour to conciliate the deity, whose representative they
have slain, by making elaborate obeisances and deprecatory
salutations</q>;<note place='foot'>W. Martin Wood, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> <q>when a bear has been killed the Ainu sit
down and admire it, make their salaams to it, worship it,
and offer presents of <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign></q>;<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), pp.
476 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign> see below,
p. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, note.</note> <q>when a bear is trapped or
wounded by an arrow, the hunters go through an apologetic
or propitiatory ceremony.</q><note place='foot'>Miss I. L. Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 277.</note> The skulls of slain bears receive
a place of honour in their huts, or are set up on sacred
posts outside the huts, and are treated with much respect:
libations of millet beer, and of <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>sake</foreign>, an intoxicating liquor,
are offered to them; and they are addressed as <q>divine
preservers</q> (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>akoshiratki kamui</foreign>), or <q>precious divinities.</q><note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 15; H.
von Siebold, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 26; W. Martin
Wood, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; J. J. Rein, <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi>, i. 447;
Von Brandt, <q>The Ainos and Japanese,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
iii. (1874) p. 134; Miss Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 275, 276; Rev. J. Batchelor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 495
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The skulls of foxes are also fastened to the sacred posts
outside the huts; they are regarded as charms against
evil spirits, and are consulted as oracles.<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, pp. 15,
16; Von Brandt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Rev. J.
Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their Folk-lore</hi>,
pp. 352-354, 504 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Yet it is
expressly said, <q>The live fox is revered just as little as the
bear; rather they avoid it as much as possible, considering
it a wily animal.</q><note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 16.</note> The bear can hardly, therefore, be
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
described as a sacred animal of the Aino, nor yet as a
totem; for they do not call themselves bears, and they kill
and eat the animal freely. However, they have a legend of
a woman who had a son by a bear; and many of them who
dwell in the mountains pride themselves on being descended
from a bear. Such people are called <q>Descendants of the
bear</q> (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Kimun Kamui sanikiri</foreign>), and in the pride of their
heart they will say, <q>As for me, I am a child of the god of
the mountains; I am descended from the divine one who
rules in the mountains,</q> meaning by <q>the god of the
mountains</q> no other than the bear.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 8-10. E. Reclus
(<hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</hi>, vii.
755) mentions a (Japanese?) legend
which attributes the hairiness of the
Ainos to the suckling of their first
ancestor by a bear. But in the absence
of other evidence this is no proof
of totemism.</note> It is therefore
possible that, as our principal authority, the Rev. J.
Batchelor, believes, the bear may have been the totem of
an Aino clan; but even if that were so it would not
explain the respect shewn for the animal by the whole Aino
people.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Aino
custom of
catching a
bear cub,
rearing it
for several
years, and
killing it at
a solemn
festival.</note>
But it is the bear-festival of the Aino which concerns
us here. Towards the end of winter a bear cub is caught
and brought into the village. If it is very small, it is suckled
by an Aino woman, but should there be no woman able to
suckle it, the little animal is fed from the hand or the mouth.
If it cries loudly and long for its mother, as it is apt to do, its
owner will take it to his bosom and let it sleep with him for
a few nights, thus dispelling its fears and sense of loneliness.
During the day it plays about in the hut with the children and
is treated with great affection. But when the cub grows big
enough to pain people by hugging or scratching them, he is
shut up in a strong wooden cage, where he stays generally
for two or three years, fed on fish and millet porridge, till
it is time for him to be killed and eaten.<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Der Baerencultus
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,</q> p. 45;
Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 483-485. Mr.
Batchelor formerly doubted or denied
that the Aino women suckle the bear
cubs (<hi rend='italic'>The Ainu of Japan</hi>, p. 173);
but since then he has repeatedly seen
them do it. Once, while he was
preaching, a cub was being passed
round among all the young women
present and suckled by each in turn.</note> But <q>it is a
peculiarly striking fact that the young bear is not kept
merely to furnish a good meal; rather he is regarded and
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
honoured as a fetish, or even as a sort of higher being.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. Rein, <hi rend='italic'>Japan</hi> (Leipsic, 1881-1886),
i. 447.</note>
In Yezo the festival is generally celebrated in September or
October. Before it takes place the Aino apologise to their
gods, alleging that they have treated the bear kindly as long
as they could, now they can feed him no longer, and are
obliged to kill him. A man who gives a bear-feast invites
his relations and friends; in a small village nearly the whole
community takes part in the feast; indeed, guests from
distant villages are invited and generally come, allured
by the prospect of getting drunk for nothing. The form of
invitation runs somewhat as follows: <q>I, so and so, am
about to sacrifice the dear little divine thing who resides
among the mountains. My friends and masters, come ye to
the feast; we will then unite in the great pleasure of sending
the god away. Come.</q><note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Der Baerencultus
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,</q> p. 45;
Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their
Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 485 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When all the people are assembled
in front of the cage, an orator chosen for the purpose
addresses the bear and tells it that they are about to send it
forth to its ancestors. He craves pardon for what they are
about to do to it, hopes it will not be angry, and comforts it
by assuring the animal that many of the sacred whittled
sticks (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign>) and plenty of cakes and wine will be sent
with it on the long journey. One speech of this sort
which Mr. Batchelor heard ran as follows: <q>O thou
divine one, thou wast sent into the world for us to hunt.
O thou precious little divinity, we worship thee; pray hear
our prayer. We have nourished thee and brought thee up
with a deal of pains and trouble, all because we love thee so.
Now, as thou hast grown big, we are about to send thee to
thy father and mother. When thou comest to them please
speak well of us, and tell them how kind we have been;
please come to us again and we will sacrifice thee.</q> Having
been secured with ropes, the bear is then let out of the cage
and assailed with a shower of blunt arrows in order to rouse
it to fury. When it has spent itself in vain struggles, it is
tied up to a stake, gagged and strangled, its neck being
placed between two poles, which are then violently compressed,
all the people eagerly helping to squeeze the
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
animal to death. An arrow is also discharged into the
beast's heart by a good marksman, but so as not to shed
blood, for they think that it would be very unlucky if any of
the blood were to drip on the ground. However, the men
sometimes drink the warm blood of the bear "that the
courage and other virtues it possesses may pass into them";
and sometimes they besmear themselves and their clothes
with the blood in order to ensure success in hunting. When
the animal has been strangled to death, it is skinned and its
head is cut off and set in the east window of the house,
where a piece of its own flesh is placed under its snout,
together with a cup of its own meat boiled, some millet
dumplings, and dried fish. Prayers are then addressed to
the dead animal; amongst other things it is sometimes
invited, after going away to its father and mother, to return
into the world in order that it may again be reared for sacrifice.
When the bear is supposed to have finished eating its
own flesh, the man who presides at the feast takes the cup
containing the boiled meat, salutes it, and divides the contents
between all the company present: every person, young
and old alike, must taste a little. The cup is called <q>the
cup of offering</q> because it has just been offered to the dead
bear. When the rest of the flesh has been cooked, it is
shared out in like manner among all the people, everybody
partaking of at least a morsel; not to partake of the feast
would be equivalent to excommunication, it would be to
place the recreant outside the pale of Aino fellowship.
Formerly every particle of the bear, except the bones, had to
be eaten up at the banquet, but this rule is now relaxed.
The head, on being detached from the skin, is set up on
a long pole beside the sacred wands (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign>) outside of the
house, where it remains till nothing but the bare white skull
is left. Skulls so set up are worshipped not only at the
time of the festival, but very often as long as they last.
The Aino assured Mr. Batchelor that they really do believe
the spirits of the worshipful animals to reside in the skulls;
that is why they address them as <q>divine preservers</q> and
<q>precious divinities.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 486-496. The
killing of the bear is described somewhat
differently by Miss I. L. Bird
(<hi rend='italic'>Unbeaten Tracks in Japan</hi>, New
Edition, 1885, pp. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), but she
did not witness the ceremony. She
tells us that at Usu, on Volcano
Bay, when the bear is being killed, the
Aino shout, <q>We kill you, O bear!
Come back soon into an Aino.</q> According
to Dr. Siebold, a very respectable
authority, the bear's own heart is
frequently offered to the dead beast to
assure him that he is still in life (<hi rend='italic'>Ethnologische
Studien über die Aino auf
der Insel Yesso</hi>, p. 26). This, however,
is denied by Dr. Scheube, who says that
the heart is eaten (<q>Baerencultus,</q> p.
50 note). The custom may vary in
different places.</note>
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dr.
Scheube's
description
of the Aino
custom of
killing of a
bear ceremonially.</note>
The ceremony of killing the bear was witnessed by
Dr. B. Scheube on the tenth of August at Kunnui,
which is a village on Volcano Bay in the island of
Yezo or Yesso. As his description of the rite contains
some interesting particulars not mentioned in the foregoing
account, it may be worth while to summarise it.<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Der Baerencultus
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
der deutschen Gesellschaft b.
S. und S. Ostasiens</hi> (Yokohama), Heft
xxii. pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
On entering the hut he found about thirty Aino present,
men, women, and children, all dressed in their best. The
master of the house first offered a libation on the fireplace to
the god of the fire, and the guests followed his example.
Then a libation was offered to the house-god in his sacred
corner of the hut. Meanwhile the housewife, who had nursed
the bear, sat by herself, silent and sad, bursting now and then
into tears. Her grief was obviously unaffected, and it
deepened as the festival went on. Next, the master of the
house and some of the guests went out of the hut and
offered libations before the bear's cage. A few drops were
presented to the bear in a saucer, which he at once upset.
Then the women and girls danced round the cage, their
faces turned towards it, their knees slightly bent, rising and
hopping on their toes. As they danced they clapped their
hands and sang a monotonous song. The housewife and a
few old women, who might have nursed many bears, danced
tearfully, stretching out their arms to the bear, and addressing
it in terms of endearment. The young folks were less
affected; they laughed as well as sang. Disturbed by the
noise, the bear began to rush about his cage and howl
lamentably. Next libations were offered at the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao (inabos)</foreign>
or sacred wands which stand outside of an Aino hut. These
wands are about a couple of feet high, and are whittled at
the top into spiral shavings.<note place='foot'>B. Scheube, <q>Baerencultus,</q> etc.,
p. 46; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ainos</hi>, p. 15; Miss I.
L. Bird, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to
these whittled wands (<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign>), which are
so conspicuous about the Aino huts,
see the Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu
and their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 89-95. He
remarks (p. 92): <q>I have often insisted
both in my lectures and also in
my writings that the Ainu do not worship
their <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign>, but that they make them
as offerings to the deities, and set them
up as signs showing reverence towards
them. This, I must now remark, is
true but in part, for while some of the
ordinary or less important kinds are
not worshipped, there are several others
which are. Those <emph>not</emph> worshipped may
almost always be regarded as offerings
and charms pure and simple, while
those which <emph>are</emph> worshipped must
generally be regarded as messengers
sent to the higher deities.</q> On the
whole Mr. Batchelor would describe the
<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign> as fetishes of various degrees of
power. See further P. Labbé, <hi rend='italic'>Un
bagne Russe, l'Isle de Sakhaline</hi> (Paris,
1903), pp. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, who compares the
use of these whittled sticks to the use
of holy candles among Roman Catholics.
In Borneo the search for camphor is
attended by many superstitions; among
other things, when the searchers have
found a tree which promises to yield
much camphor <q>they plant near their
hut a stake, whereof the outer surface
has been cut into curled shavings and
tufts down the sides and at the top</q>
(W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>Home-life of Borneo
Head-hunters</hi>, Philadelphia, 1902, p.
168). According to some ancient
authorities, the old Italians worshipped
peeled sticks as gods or as the images
of gods; however, the statement seems
no better than an etymological guess
to explain the word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delubrum</foreign>. See
Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Delubrum,</q> p. 73, ed.
C. O. Müller; Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi>
ii. 225.</note> Five new wands with bamboo
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
leaves attached to them had been set up for the festival.
This is regularly done when a bear is killed; the leaves
mean that the animal may come to life again. Then the bear
was let out of his cage, a rope was thrown round his neck,
and he was led about in the neighbourhood of the hut.
While this was being done the men, headed by a chief, shot
at the beast with arrows tipped with wooden buttons. Dr.
Scheube had to do so also. Then the bear was taken before
the sacred wands, a stick was put in his mouth, nine men
knelt on him and pressed his neck against a beam. In
five minutes the animal had expired without uttering a sound.
Meantime the women and girls had taken post behind the
men, where they danced, lamenting, and beating the men
who were killing the bear. The bear's carcase was next
placed on the mat before the sacred wands; and a sword and
quiver, taken from the wands, were hung round the beast's
neck. Being a she-bear, it was also adorned with a necklace
and ear-rings. Then food and drink were offered to it, in
the shape of millet-broth, millet-cakes, and a pot of <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>sake</foreign>.
The men now sat down on mats before the dead bear,
offered libations to it, and drank deep. Meanwhile the
women and girls had laid aside all marks of sorrow, and
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
danced merrily, none more merrily than the old women.
When the mirth was at its height two young Aino, who
had let the bear out of his cage, mounted the roof of the
hut and threw cakes of millet among the company, who all
scrambled for them without distinction of age or sex. The
bear was next skinned and disembowelled, and the trunk
severed from the head, to which the skin was left hanging.
The blood, caught in cups, was eagerly swallowed by the
men. None of the women or children appeared to drink the
blood, though custom did not forbid them to do so. The
liver was cut in small pieces and eaten raw, with salt, the
women and children getting their share. The flesh and the
rest of the vitals were taken into the house to be kept till
the next day but one, and then to be divided among the
persons who had been present at the feast. Blood and liver
were offered to Dr. Scheube. While the bear was being disembowelled,
the women and girls danced the same dance
which they had danced at the beginning&mdash;not, however,
round the cage, but in front of the sacred wands. At this
dance the old women, who had been merry a moment before,
again shed tears freely. After the brain had been extracted
from the bear's head and swallowed with salt, the skull,
detached from the skin, was hung on a pole beside the
sacred wands. The stick with which the bear had been
gagged was also fastened to the pole, and so were the sword
and quiver which had been hung on the carcase. The latter
were removed in about an hour, but the rest remained standing.
The whole company, men and women, danced noisily
before the pole; and another drinking-bout, in which the
women joined, closed the festival.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Early
Japanese
account of
the Aino
festival of
the bear.</note>
Perhaps the first published account of the bear-feast of
the Aino is one which was given to the world by a Japanese
writer in 1652. It has been translated into French and runs
thus: <q>When they find a young bear, they bring it home,
and the wife suckles it. When it is grown they feed it with
fish and fowl and kill it in winter for the sake of the liver,
which they esteem an antidote to poison, the worms, colic,
and disorders of the stomach. It is of a very bitter taste,
and is good for nothing if the bear has been killed in
summer. This butchery begins in the first Japanese month.
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
For this purpose they put the animal's head between two
long poles, which are squeezed together by fifty or sixty
people, both men and women. When the bear is dead
they eat his flesh, keep the liver as a medicine, and sell the
skin, which is black and commonly six feet long, but the
longest measure twelve feet. As soon as he is skinned, the
persons who nourished the beast begin to bewail him;
afterwards they make little cakes to regale those who
helped them.</q><note place='foot'><q>Ieso-Ki, ou description de l'île
d'Iesso, avec une notice sur la révolte
de Samsay-in, composée par l'interprète
Kannemon,</q> printed in Malte-Brun's
<hi rend='italic'>Annales des Voyages</hi>, xxiv.
(Paris, 1814) p. 154.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The custom
of rearing
and killing
bears
among the
Aino of
Saghalien.</note>
The Aino of Saghalien rear bear cubs and kill them
with similar ceremonies. We are told that they do not look
upon the bear as a god but only as a messenger whom they
despatch with various commissions to the god of the forest.
The animal is kept for about two years in a cage, and then
killed at a festival, which always takes place in winter and
at night. The day before the sacrifice is devoted to
lamentation, old women relieving each other in the duty of
weeping and groaning in front of the bear's cage. Then
about the middle of the night or very early in the morning
an orator makes a long speech to the beast, reminding him
how they have taken care of him, and fed him well, and
bathed him in the river, and made him warm and comfortable.
<q>Now,</q> he proceeds, <q>we are holding a great festival in your
honour. Be not afraid. We will not hurt you. We will
only kill you and send you to the god of the forest who
loves you. We are about to offer you a good dinner, the
best you have ever eaten among us, and we will all weep
for you together. The Aino who will kill you is the best
shot among us. There he is, he weeps and asks your
forgiveness; you will feel almost nothing, it will be done so
quickly. We cannot feed you always, as you will understand.
We have done enough for you; it is now your turn to
sacrifice yourself for us. You will ask God to send us, for
the winter, plenty of otters and sables, and for the summer,
seals and fish in abundance. Do not forget our messages,
we love you much, and our children will never forget you.</q>
When the bear has partaken of his last meal amid the
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
general emotion of the spectators, the old women weeping
afresh and the men uttering stifled cries, he is strapped, not
without difficulty and danger, and being let out of the cage
is led on leash or dragged, according to the state of his
temper, thrice round his cage, then round his master's house,
and lastly round the house of the orator. Thereupon he is
tied up to a tree, which is decked with sacred whittled sticks
(<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign>) of the usual sort; and the orator again addresses him
in a long harangue, which sometimes lasts till the day is
beginning to break. <q>Remember,</q> he cries, <q>remember!
I remind you of your whole life and of the services we have
rendered you. It is now for you to do your duty. Do not
forget what I have asked of you. You will tell the gods to
give us riches, that our hunters may return from the forest
laden with rare furs and animals good to eat; that our
fishers may find troops of seals on the shore and in the sea,
and that their nets may crack under the weight of the fish.
We have no hope but in you. The evil spirits laugh at us,
and too often they are unfavourable and malignant to us,
but they will bow before you. We have given you food and
joy and health; now we kill you in order that you may
in return send riches to us and to our children.</q> To this
discourse the bear, more and more surly and agitated, listens
without conviction; round and round the tree he paces and
howls lamentably, till, just as the first beams of the rising
sun light up the scene, an archer speeds an arrow to his
heart. No sooner has he done so, than the marksman
throws away his bow and flings himself on the ground, and
the old men and women do the same, weeping and sobbing.
Then they offer the dead beast a repast of rice and wild
potatoes, and having spoken to him in terms of pity and
thanked him for what he has done and suffered, they cut off
his head and paws and keep them as sacred things. A
banquet on the flesh and blood of the bear follows. Women
were formerly excluded from it, but now they share with the
men. The blood is drunk warm by all present; the flesh
is boiled, custom forbids it to be roasted. And as the relics
of the bear may not enter the house by the door, and Aino
houses in Saghalien have no windows, a man gets up on the
roof and lets the flesh, the head, and the skin down through
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
the smoke-hole. Rice and wild potatoes are then offered to
the head, and a pipe, tobacco, and matches are considerately
placed beside it. Custom requires that the guests should
eat up the whole animal before they depart: the use of salt
and pepper at the meal is forbidden; and no morsel of the
flesh may be given to the dogs. When the banquet is over,
the head is carried away into the depth of the forest and
deposited on a heap of bears' skulls, the bleached and mouldering
relics of similar festivals in the past.<note place='foot'>P. Labbé, <hi rend='italic'>Un Bagne Russe, l'Isle
de Sakhaline</hi> (Paris, 1903), pp. 227,
232-258. The Gilyaks of Saghalien
similarly keep and sacrifice bears; but
the ceremonies are simpler, and they
treat the animals with less respect than
the Aino. See P. Labbé, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
261-267.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bear-festivals
of
the Gilyaks.</note>
The Gilyaks, a Tunguzian people of Eastern Siberia,<note place='foot'>They inhabit the banks of the
lower Amoor and the north of Saghalien.
See E. G. Ravenstein, <hi rend='italic'>The
Russians on the Amur</hi> (London, 1861),
p. 389.</note>
hold a bear-festival of the same sort once a year in January.
<q>The bear is the object of the most refined solicitude of an
entire village and plays the chief part in their religious
ceremonies.</q><note place='foot'><q>Notes on the River Amur and
the Adjacent Districts,</q> translated from
the Russian, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal
Geographical Society</hi>, xxviii. (1858) p.
396.</note> An old she-bear is shot and her cub is reared,
but not suckled, in the village. When the bear is big enough
he is taken from his cage and dragged through the village.
But first they lead him to the bank of the river, for this is
believed to ensure abundance of fish to each family. He is
then taken into every house in the village, where fish, brandy,
and so forth are offered to him. Some people prostrate
themselves before the beast. His entrance into a house is
supposed to bring a blessing; and if he snuffs at the food
offered to him, this also is a blessing. Nevertheless they
tease and worry, poke and tickle the animal continually, so
that he is surly and snappish.<note place='foot'>Compare the custom of pinching
a frog before cutting off his head; see
<hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of
Kings</hi>, ii. 86. In Japan sorceresses
bury a dog in the earth, tease him,
then cut off his head and put it in a
box to be used in magic. See A.
Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer des alten
Amerika</hi> (Berlin, 1878), i. 475 note,
who adds <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>wie im ostindischen Archipelago
die Schutzseele gereizt wird</foreign>.</q>
He probably refers to the Batta <foreign rend='italic'>Pang-hulu-balang</foreign>.
See H. von Rosenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi> (Leipsic,
1878), pp. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Ködding, <q>Die
Batakschen Götter,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xii. (1885) pp. 478
sq.; J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane-en
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
Tweede Serie, dl. iii. (1886) Afdeeling,
meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2, p.
306; Van Dijk, in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxxviii. (1895) pp. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> After being thus taken to
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
every house, he is tied to a peg and shot dead with arrows.
His head is then cut off, decked with shavings, and placed
on the table where the feast is set out. Here they beg
pardon of the beast and worship him. Then his flesh is
roasted and eaten in special vessels of wood finely carved.
They do not eat the flesh raw nor drink the blood, as the
Aino do. The brain and entrails are eaten last; and the
skull, still decked with shavings, is placed on a tree near the
house. Then the people sing and both sexes dance in
ranks, as bears.<note place='foot'>W. Joest, in B. Scheube, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Ainos</hi>, p. 17; J. Deniker, <q>Les
Ghiliaks d'après les derniers renseignements,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, ii.
(1883) pp. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (on the authority
of Mr. Seeland); <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnologie</hi>, i. (1888) p. 102
(on the authority of Captain Jacobsen);
<hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Anthropologie</hi>, xxvi. (1900)
p. 796 (abstract of a Russian work on
the Gilyaks by Dr. Seland or Seeland).
What exactly is meant by <q>dancing as
bears</q> (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>tanzen beide Geschlechter
Reigentänze, wie Bären</foreign>,</q> Joest, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>)
does not appear.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>L. von
Schrenck's
description
of a bear-festival
among the
Gilyaks of
the Amoor. Bears led
in procession
about
the village.
Slaughter
of the
bears.</note>
One of these bear-festivals was witnessed by the Russian
traveller L. von Schrenck and his companions at the Gilyak
village of Tebach in January 1856. From his detailed
report of the ceremony we may gather some particulars
which are not noticed in the briefer accounts which I have
just summarised. The bear, he tells us, plays a great part
in the life of all the peoples inhabiting the region of the
Amoor and Siberia as far as Kamtchatka, but among none
of them is his importance greater than among the Gilyaks.
The immense size which the animal attains in the valley of
the Amoor, his ferocity whetted by hunger, and the frequency
of his appearance, all combine to make him the most
dreaded beast of prey in the country. No wonder, therefore,
that the fancy of the Gilyaks is busied with him and surrounds
him, both in life and in death, with a sort of halo of
superstitious fear. Thus, for example, it is thought that if
a Gilyak falls in combat with a bear, his soul transmigrates
into the body of the beast. Nevertheless his flesh has an
irresistible attraction for the Gilyak palate, especially when
the animal has been kept in captivity for some time and
fattened on fish, which gives the flesh, in the opinion of the
Gilyaks, a peculiarly delicious flavour. But in order to
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
enjoy this dainty with impunity they deem it needful to
perform a long series of ceremonies, of which the intention
is to delude the living bear by a show of respect, and to
appease the anger of the dead animal by the homage paid
to his departed spirit. The marks of respect begin as soon
as the beast is captured. He is brought home in triumph
and kept in a cage, where all the villagers take it in turns
to feed him. For although he may have been captured or
purchased by one man, he belongs in a manner to the
whole village. His flesh will furnish a common feast, and
hence all must contribute to support him in his life. His
diet consists exclusively of raw or dried fish, water, and a
sort of porridge compounded of powdered fish-skins, train-oil,
and whortle-berries. The length of time he is kept in
captivity depends on his age. Old bears are kept only a
few months; cubs are kept till they are full-grown. A
thick layer of fat on the captive bear gives the signal for
the festival, which is always held in winter, generally in
December but sometimes in January or February. At the
festival witnessed by the Russian travellers, which lasted a
good many days, three bears were killed and eaten. More
than once the animals were led about in procession and
compelled to enter every house in the village, where they
were fed as a mark of honour, and to shew that they were
welcome guests. But before the beasts set out on this
round of visits, the Gilyaks played at skipping-rope in
presence, and perhaps, as L. von Schrenck inclined to
believe, in honour of the animals. The night before they
were killed, the three bears were led by moonlight a long
way on the ice of the frozen river. That night no one in the
village might sleep. Next day, after the animals had been
again led down the steep bank to the river, and conducted
thrice round the hole in the ice from which the women of
the village drew their water, they were taken to an appointed
place not far from the village, and shot to death
with arrows. The place of sacrifice or execution was
marked as holy by being surrounded with whittled sticks,
from the tops of which shavings hung in curls. Such sticks
are with the Gilyaks, as with the Aino, the regular symbols
that accompany all religious ceremonies. Before the bears
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
received the fatal shafts from two young men chosen for the
purpose, the boys were allowed to discharge their small but
not always harmless arrows at the beasts. As soon as the
carcases had been cut up, the skins with the heads attached
to them were set up in a wooden cage in such a way as to
make it appear that the animals had entered the cage and
were looking out of it. The blood which flowed from the
bears on the spot where they were killed was immediately
covered up with snow, to prevent any one from accidentally
treading on it, a thing which was strictly tabooed.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Treatment
of the bears'
skins.</note>
When the house has been arranged and decorated for
their reception, the skins of the bears, with their heads
attached to them, are brought into it, not however by the
door, but through a window, and then hung on a sort of
scaffold opposite the hearth on which the flesh is to be
cooked. This ceremony of bringing the bears' skins into
the house by the window was not witnessed by the Russian
travellers, who only learned of it at second hand. They
were told that when the thin disc of fish-skin, which is the
substitute for a pane of glass in the window, has been replaced
after the passage of the bear-skins, a figure of a
toad made of birch bark is affixed to it on the outside,
while inside the house a figure of a bear dressed in Gilyak
costume is set on the bench of honour. The meaning of this
part of the ceremony, as it is conjecturally interpreted by
Von Schrenck, may be as follows. The toad is a creature
that has a very evil reputation with the Gilyaks, and
accordingly they attempt to lay upon it, as on a scapegoat,
the guilt of the slaughter of the worshipful bear. Hence its
effigy is excluded from the house and has to remain outside
at the window, a witness of its own misdeeds; whereas the
bear is brought into the house and treated as an honoured
guest, for fish and flesh are laid before it, and its effigy,
dressed in Gilyak costume, is seated on the bench of honour.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Treatment
of the bears'
flesh.</note>
The boiling of the bears' flesh among the Gilyaks is
done only by the oldest men, whose high privilege it is;
women and children, young men and boys have no part in
it. The task is performed slowly and deliberately, with a
certain solemnity. On the occasion described by the
Russian travellers the kettle was first of all surrounded with
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
a thick wreath of shavings, and then filled with snow, for
the use of water to cook bear's flesh is forbidden. Meanwhile
a large wooden trough, richly adorned with arabesques
and carvings of all sorts, was hung immediately under the
snouts of the bears; on one side of the trough was carved in
relief a bear, on the other side a toad. When the carcases
were being cut up, each leg was laid on the ground in front
of the bears, as if to ask their leave, before being placed in
the kettle; and the boiled flesh was fished out of the kettle
with an iron hook, and set in the trough before the bears,
in order that they might be the first to taste of their own
flesh. As fast, too, as the fat was cut in strips it was hung
up in front of the bears, and afterwards laid in a small
wooden trough on the ground before them. Last of all the
inner organs of the beasts were cut up and placed in small
vessels. At the same time the women made bandages out
of parti-coloured rags, and after sunset these bandages were
tied round the bears' snouts just below the eyes <q>in order to
dry the tears that flowed from them.</q> To each bandage,
just below the eyes, was attached a figure of a toad cut out
of birch bark. The meaning of this appears to be, as Von
Schrenck conjectured, as follows. With the carving of his
inner organs, the heart, liver, and so forth, the bear sees that
his fate is sealed, and sheds some natural tears at his hard
lot. These tears trickle down his snout over the figure of
the toad, which the poor deluded bear accordingly regards as
the author of all the mischief. For he cannot blame the
Gilyaks, who have treated him so kindly. Have they not
received him as a guest in their house, set him on the seat
of honour, given him of their best, and done nothing but
with his knowledge and permission? Finally, have not their
women shewn him the last delicate mark of attention by
drying the tears that flow from his eyes and trickle down
his nose? Surely then he cannot think that these kindly
folk have done him any harm; it was all the fault of the
unprincipled toad.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Banquet on
the bears'
flesh. Dance of
the women.
Disposal of
the skull
and bones
of the bear.</note>
Whatever may be thought of this explanation, as soon
as the ceremony of wiping away poor bruin's tears had been
performed, the assembled Gilyaks set to work in earnest to
devour his flesh. The broth obtained by boiling the meat
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
had already been partaken of. The wooden bowls, platters,
and spoons out of which the Gilyaks eat the broth and flesh
of the bears on these occasions are always made specially
for the purpose at the festival and only then; they are
elaborately ornamented with carved figures of bears and
other devices that refer to the animal or the festival, and
the people have a strong superstitious scruple against parting
with them. While the festival lasts, no salt may be used in
cooking the bear's flesh or indeed any other food; and no
flesh of any kind may be roasted, for the bear would hear
the hissing and sputtering of the roasting flesh, and would
be very angry. After the bones had been picked clean they
were put back in the kettle in which the flesh had been
boiled. And when the festal meal was over, an old man
took his stand at the door of the house with a branch of fir
in his hand, with which, as the people passed out, he gave a
light blow to every one who had eaten of the bear's flesh
or fat, perhaps as a punishment for their treatment of the
worshipful animal. In the afternoon of the same day the
women performed a strange dance. Only one woman
danced at a time, throwing the upper part of her body into
the oddest postures, while she held in her hands a branch of
fir or a kind of wooden castanets. The other women meanwhile
played an accompaniment in a peculiar rhythm by
drumming on the beams of the house with clubs. The
dance reminded one of the Russian travellers of the bear-dance
which he had seen danced by the women of Kamtchatka.
Von Schrenck believes, though he has not positive
evidence, that after the fat and flesh of the bear have been
consumed, his skull is cleft with an axe, and the brain taken
out and eaten. Then the bones and the skull are solemnly
carried out by the oldest people to a place in the forest
not far from the village. There all the bones except the
skull are buried. After that a young tree is felled a few
inches above the ground, its stump cleft, and the skull
wedged into the cleft. When the grass grows over the spot,
the skull disappears from view, and that is the end of the
bear.<note place='foot'>L. von Schrenck, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen und Forschungen im Amur-lande</hi> (St. Petersburg,
1891), iii. 696-731.</note>
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mr. L.
Sternberg's
description
of the bear-festivals
of
the Gilyaks.</note>
Another description of the bear-festivals of the Gilyaks
has been given us by Mr. Leo Sternberg.<note place='foot'>L. Sternberg, <q>Die Religion der Giljaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
viii. (1905) pp. 260-274.</note> It agrees substantially
with the foregoing accounts, but a few particulars
in it may be noted. According to Mr. Sternberg, the festival
is usually held in honour of a deceased relation: the next of
kin either buys or catches a bear cub and nurtures it for two
or three years till it is ready for the sacrifice. Only certain
distinguished guests (<foreign rend='italic'>Narch-en</foreign>) are privileged to partake of
the bear's flesh, but the host and members of his clan eat a
broth made from the flesh; great quantities of this broth are
prepared and consumed on the occasion. The guests of
honour (<foreign rend='italic'>Narch-en</foreign>) must belong to the clan into which the
host's daughters and the other women of his clan are
married: one of these guests, usually the host's son-in-law,
is entrusted with the duty of shooting the bear dead with
an arrow. The skin, head, and flesh of the slain bear are
brought into the house not through the door but through
the smoke-hole; a quiver full of arrows is laid under the
head and beside it are deposited tobacco, sugar, and other
food. The soul of the bear is supposed to carry off the souls
of these things with it on the far journey. A special vessel
is used for cooking the bear's flesh, and the fire must be
kindled by a sacred apparatus of flint and steel, which
belongs to the clan and is handed down from generation to
generation, but which is never used to light fires except on
these solemn occasions. Of all the many viands cooked for
the consumption of the assembled people a portion is placed
in a special vessel and set before the bear's head: this is
called <q>feeding the head.</q> After the bear has been killed,
dogs are sacrificed in couples of male and female. Before
being throttled, they are fed and invited to go to their lord
on the highest mountain, to change their skins, and to return
next year in the form of bears. The soul of the dead bear
departs to the same lord, who is also lord of the primaeval
forest; it goes away laden with the offerings that have been
made to it, and attended by the souls of the dogs and also
by the souls of the sacred whittled sticks, which figure
prominently at the festival.
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bear-festivals
of
the Goldi.</note>
The Goldi, neighbours of the Gilyaks, treat the bear in
much the same way. They hunt and kill it; but sometimes
they capture a live bear and keep him in a cage, feeding him
well and calling him their son and brother. Then at a great
festival he is taken from his cage, paraded about with marked
consideration, and afterwards killed and eaten. <q>The skull,
jaw-bones, and ears are then suspended on a tree, as an
antidote against evil spirits; but the flesh is eaten and much
relished, for they believe that all who partake of it acquire a
zest for the chase, and become courageous.</q><note place='foot'>E. G. Ravenstein, <hi rend='italic'>The Russians
on the Amur</hi> (London, 1861), pp.
379 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; T. W. Atkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in the Regions of the Upper and
Lower Amoor</hi> (London, 1860), pp.
482 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bear-festivals
of the
Orotchis.</note>
The Orotchis, another Tunguzian people of the region of
the Amoor, hold bear-festivals of the same general character.
Any one who catches a bear cub considers it his bounden
duty to rear it in a cage for about three years, in order at
the end of that time to kill it publicly and eat the flesh with
his friends. The feasts being public, though organised by
individuals, the people try to have one in each Orotchi village
every year in turn. When the bear is taken out of his cage,
he is led about by means of ropes to all the huts, accompanied
by people armed with lances, bows, and arrows. At
each hut the bear and bear-leaders are treated to something
good to eat and drink. This goes on for several days until
all the huts, not only in that village but also in the next,
have been visited. The days are given up to sport and
noisy jollity. Then the bear is tied to a tree or wooden
pillar and shot to death by the arrows of the crowd, after
which its flesh is roasted and eaten. Among the Orotchis
of the Tundja River women take part in the bear-feasts,
while among the Orotchis of the River Vi the women will
not even touch bear's flesh.<note place='foot'>E. H. Fraser, <q>The Fish-skin
Tartars,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the China Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society for the year
1891-1892</hi>, New Series, xxvi. 36-39.
L. von Schrenck describes a bear-feast
which he witnessed in 1855 among
the Oltscha (<hi rend='italic'>Reisen und Forschungen
im Amur-lande</hi>, iii. 723-728). The
Oltscha are probably the same as the
Orotchis.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Respect
shewn by
all these
tribes for
the bears
which they
kill and eat.</note>
In the treatment of the captive bear by these tribes there
are features which can hardly be distinguished from worship.
Such, for example, are the prayers offered to it both alive
and dead; the offerings of food, including portions of its
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
own flesh, laid before the animal's skull; and the Gilyak
custom of leading the living beast on to the ice of the river
in order to ensure a supply of fish, and of conducting him
from house to house in order that every family may receive
his blessing, just as in Europe a May-tree or a personal
representative of the tree-spirit used to be taken from door
to door in spring for the sake of diffusing among all and
sundry the fresh energies of reviving nature.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, the
solemn participation in his flesh and blood, and particularly
the Aino custom of sharing the contents of the cup which
had been consecrated by being set before the dead beast, are
strongly suggestive of a sacrament, and the suggestion is
confirmed by the Gilyak practice of reserving special vessels
to hold the flesh and cooking it on a fire kindled by a sacred
apparatus which is never employed except on these religious
occasions. Indeed our principal authority on Aino religion,
the Rev. John Batchelor, frankly describes as worship the
ceremonious respect which the Aino pay to the bear,<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 492, 493, 495,
496.</note> and
he affirms that the animal is undoubtedly one of their gods.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> p. 482. Mr. Batchelor
says <q>totem gods.</q></note>
Certainly the Aino appear to apply their name for god
(<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>kamui</foreign>) freely to the bear; but, as Mr. Batchelor himself
points out,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> pp. 580 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> that word is used with many different shades of
meaning and is applied to a great variety of objects, so that
from its application to the bear we cannot safely argue that
the animal is actually regarded as a deity. Indeed we are
expressly told that the Aino of Saghalien do not consider
the bear to be a god but only a messenger to the gods, and
the message with which they charge the animal at its death
bears out the statement.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Apparently the Gilyaks also look
on the bear in the light of an envoy despatched with
presents to the Lord of the Mountain, on whom the welfare
of the people depends. At the same time they treat the
animal as a being of a higher order than man, in fact as a
minor deity, whose presence in the village, so long as he is
kept and fed, diffuses blessings, especially by keeping at bay
the swarms of evil spirits who are constantly lying in wait for
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
people, stealing their goods and destroying their bodies by
sickness and disease. Moreover, by partaking of the flesh,
blood, or broth of the bear, the Gilyaks, the Aino, and the
Goldi are all of opinion that they acquire some portion of
the animal's mighty powers, particularly his courage and
strength. No wonder, therefore, that they should treat so
great a benefactor with marks of the highest respect and
affection.<note place='foot'>This account of the attitude of the
Gilyaks to the bear, and of their reasons
for holding the festival, is the one given
by Mr. Leo Sternberg. See his articles,
<q>Die Religion der Giljaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv
für Religionswissenschaft</hi>, viii. (1905)
pp. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 456-458. He speaks of
the bear as a minor deity (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Er selbst
ist ja eine Gottheit, wenn auch eine
kleine</foreign></q>). Mr. Sternberg and Mr.
Batchelor, two of the best-informed
writers on the subject, agree in denying
that the slaughter of the bear at the
festival is a sacrifice to the gods. See
L. Sternberg, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 457; Rev.
J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their Folk-lore</hi>,
p. 482. As to the belief of the
Gilyaks in evil spirits, which menace
and destroy the life of man, see L.
Sternberg, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 460 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
respect
shewn by
the Aino
for the
eagle-owls
which they
keep in
cages and
kill.</note>
Some light may be thrown on the ambiguous attitude of
the Aino to bears by comparing the similar treatment which
they accord to other creatures. For example, they regard
the eagle-owl as a good deity who by his hooting warns
men of threatened evil and defends them against it; hence
he is loved, trusted, and devoutly worshipped as a divine
mediator between men and the Creator. The various names
applied to him are significant both of his divinity and of his
mediatorship. Whenever an opportunity offers, one of these
divine birds is captured and kept in a cage, where he is
greeted with the endearing titles of <q>Beloved god</q> and
<q>Dear little divinity.</q> Nevertheless the time comes when
the dear little divinity is throttled and sent away in his
capacity of mediator to take a message to the superior gods
or to the Creator himself. The following is the form of
prayer addressed to the eagle-owl when it is about to be
sacrificed: <q>Beloved deity, we have brought you up because
we loved you, and now we are about to send you to
your father. We herewith offer you food, <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign>, wine, and
cakes; take them to your parent, and he will be very
pleased. When you come to him say, <q>I have lived a long
time among the Ainu, where an Ainu father and an Ainu
mother reared me. I now come to thee. I have brought a
variety of good things. I saw while living in Ainu-land a
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
great deal of distress. I observed that some of the people
were possessed by demons, some were wounded by wild
animals, some were hurt by landslides, others suffered shipwreck,
and many were attacked by disease. The people are
in great straits. My father, hear me, and hasten to look
upon the Ainu and help them.</q> If you do this, your father
will help us.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, pp. 410-415.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
respect
shewn by
the Aino
for the
eagles and
hawks
which they
keep in
cages and
kill.</note>
Again, the Aino keep eagles in cages, worship them as
divinities, and ask them to defend the people from evil. Yet
they offer the bird in sacrifice, and when they are about to
do so they pray to him, saying: <q>O precious divinity, O
thou divine bird, pray listen to my words. Thou dost not
belong to this world, for thy home is with the Creator and
his golden eagles. This being so, I present thee with these
<foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign> and cakes and other precious things. Do thou ride
upon the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>inao</foreign> and ascend to thy home in the glorious heavens.
When thou arrivest, assemble the deities of thy own kind
together and thank them for us for having governed the
world. Do thou come again, I beseech thee, and rule over
us. O my precious one, go thou quietly.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
432 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Once more, the
Aino revere hawks, keep them in cages, and offer them in
sacrifice. At the time of killing one of them the following
prayer should be addressed to the bird: <q>O divine hawk,
thou art an expert hunter, please cause thy cleverness to
descend on me.</q> If a hawk is well treated in captivity
and prayed to after this fashion when he is about to be
killed, he will surely send help to the hunter.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
438.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Advantages
which the
Aino hopes
to reap
from
slaughtering
the
worshipful
animals.</note>
Thus the Aino hopes to profit in various ways by
slaughtering the creatures, which, nevertheless, he treats as
divine. He expects them to carry messages for him to their
kindred or to the gods in the upper world; he hopes to
partake of their virtues by imbibing parts of their bodies or
in other ways; and apparently he looks forward to their
bodily resurrection in this world, which will enable him
again to catch and kill them, and again to reap all the
benefits which he has already derived from their slaughter.
For in the prayers addressed to the worshipful bear and the
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
worshipful eagle before they are knocked on the head the
creatures are invited to come again,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</note> which seems clearly to
point to a faith in their future resurrection. If any doubt
could exist on this head, it would be dispelled by the
evidence of Mr. Batchelor, who tells us that the Aino <q>are
firmly convinced that the spirits of birds and animals killed
in hunting or offered in sacrifice come and live again upon the
earth clothed with a body; and they believe, further, that
they appear here for the special benefit of men, particularly
Ainu hunters.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi>, p. 479.</note> The Aino, Mr. Batchelor tells us, <q>confessedly
slays and eats the beast that another may come in
its place and be treated in like manner</q>; and at the time
of sacrificing the creatures <q>prayers are said to them which
form a request that they will come again and furnish viands
for another feast, as if it were an honour to them to be thus
killed and eaten, and a pleasure as well. Indeed such is the
people's idea.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
481, 482.</note> These last observations, as the context
shews, refer especially to the sacrifice of bears.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The bear-festivals
of
these tribes
are probably
nothing
but
an extension
of the
similar rites
which the
hunter performs
over
any wild
bear which
he kills in
the forest.</note>
Thus among the benefits which the Aino anticipates
from the slaughter of the worshipful animals not the least
substantial is that of gorging himself on their flesh and
blood, both on the present and on many a similar occasion
hereafter; and that pleasing prospect again is derived from
his firm faith in the spiritual immortality and bodily resurrection
of the dead animals. A like faith is shared by many
savage hunters in many parts of the world and has given rise
to a variety of quaint customs, some of which will be described
presently. Meantime it is not unimportant to observe
that the solemn festivals at which the Aino, the Gilyaks, and
other tribes slaughter the tame caged bears with demonstrations
of respect and sorrow, are probably nothing but an
extension or glorification of similar rites which the hunter performs
over any wild bear which he chances to kill in the forest.
Indeed with regard to the Gilyaks we are expressly informed
that this is the case. If we would understand the meaning
of the Gilyak ritual, says Mr. Sternberg, <q>we must above all
remember that the bear-festivals are not, as is usually but
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
falsely assumed, celebrated only at the killing of a house-bear
but are held on every occasion when a Gilyak succeeds
in slaughtering a bear in the chase. It is true that in such
cases the festival assumes less imposing dimensions, but in its
essence it remains the same. When the head and skin of a
bear killed in the forest are brought into the village, they are
accorded a triumphal reception with music and solemn ceremonial.
The head is laid on a consecrated scaffold, fed, and
treated with offerings, just as at the killing of a house-bear;
and the guests of honour (<foreign rend='italic'>Narch-en</foreign>) are also assembled. So,
too, dogs are sacrificed, and the bones of the bear are preserved
in the same place and with the same marks of respect
as the bones of a house-bear. Hence the great winter
festival is only an extension of the rite which is observed at
the slaughter of every bear.</q><note place='foot'>L. Sternberg, <q>Die Religion der Giljaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
viii. (1905) p. 272.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
apparent
contradiction
in the
behaviour
of these
tribes to
bears is not
so great as
it seems to
us at first
sight.
Savage
logic.</note>
Thus the apparent contradiction in the practice of these
tribes, who venerate and almost deify the animals which
they habitually hunt, kill, and eat, is not so flagrant as at
first sight it appears to us: the people have reasons, and
some very practical reasons, for acting as they do. For the
savage is by no means so illogical and unpractical as to
superficial observers he is apt to seem; he has thought
deeply on the questions which immediately concern him, he
reasons about them, and though his conclusions often diverge
very widely from ours, we ought not to deny him the credit
of patient and prolonged meditation on some fundamental
problems of human existence. In the present case, if he
treats bears in general as creatures wholly subservient to
human needs and yet singles out certain individuals of the
species for homage which almost amounts to deification,
we must not hastily set him down as irrational and inconsistent,
but must endeavour to place ourselves at his
point of view, to see things as he sees them, and to divest
ourselves of the prepossessions which tinge so deeply our
own views of the world. If we do so, we shall probably
discover that, however absurd his conduct may appear
to us, the savage nevertheless generally acts on a train
of reasoning which seems to him in harmony with the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
facts of his limited experience. This I propose to illustrate
in the following chapter, where I shall attempt to shew that
the solemn ceremonial of the bear-festival among the Ainos
and other tribes of north-eastern Asia is only a particularly
striking example of the respect which on the principles
of his rude philosophy the savage habitually pays to the
animals which he kills and eats.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV. The Propitiation of Wild Animals by Hunters.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The savage
believes
that
animals,
like men,
are endowed
with souls
which survive
the
death of
their
bodies.
The American
Indians
draw no
sharp distinction
between
animals
and men.</note>
The explanation of life by the theory of an indwelling
and practically immortal soul is one which the savage
does not confine to human beings but extends to the
animate creation in general. In so doing he is more
liberal and perhaps more logical than the civilised man, who
commonly denies to animals that privilege of immortality
which he claims for himself. The savage is not so proud; he
commonly believes that animals are endowed with feelings
and intelligence like those of men, and that, like men, they
possess souls which survive the death of their bodies either
to wander about as disembodied spirits or to be born again
in animal form. Thus, for example, we are told that the
Indian of Guiana does not see <q>any sharp line of distinction,
such as we see, between man and other animals, between
one kind of animal and another, or between animals&mdash;man
included&mdash;and inanimate objects. On the contrary, to the
Indian, all objects, animate and inanimate, seem exactly of
the same nature except that they differ in the accident of
bodily form. Every object in the whole world is a being,
consisting of a body and spirit, and differs from every other
object in no respect except that of bodily form, and in the
greater or less degree of brute power and brute cunning
consequent on the difference of bodily form and bodily
habits.</q><note place='foot'>E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Indians of Guiana</hi> (London, 1883), p. 350.</note> Similarly we read that <q>in Cherokee mythology,
as in that of Indian tribes generally, there is no essential
difference between men and animals. In the primal genesis
period they seem to be completely undifferentiated, and we
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
find all creatures alike living and working together in harmony
and mutual helpfulness until man, by his aggressiveness
and disregard for the rights of the others, provokes their
hostility, when insects, birds, fishes, reptiles, and fourfooted
beasts join forces against him. Henceforth their lives are
apart, but the difference is always one of degree only. The
animals, like the people, are organized into tribes and have
like them their chiefs and townhouses, their councils and
ballplays, and the same hereafter in the Darkening land of
Usunhiyi. Man is still the paramount power, and hunts
and slaughters the others as his own necessities compel, but
is obliged to satisfy the animal tribes in every instance, very
much as a murder is compounded for, according to the
Indian system, by <q>covering the bones of the dead</q> with
presents for the bereaved relatives.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the Cherokee,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report of
the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 261.</note> To the same effect
another observer of the North American Indians writes:
<q>I have often reflected on the curious connexion which
appears to subsist in the mind of an Indian between man
and the brute creation, and found much matter in it for
curious observation. Although they consider themselves
superior to all other animals and are very proud of that
superiority; although they believe that the beasts of the
forest, the birds of the air, and the fishes of the waters, were
created by the Almighty Being for the use of man; yet it
seems as if they ascribe the difference between themselves
and the brute kind, and the dominion which they have over
them, more to their superior bodily strength and dexterity
than to their immortal souls. All beings endowed by the
Creator with the power of volition and self-motion, they
view in a manner as a great society of which they are the
head, whom they are appointed, indeed, to govern, but between
whom and themselves intimate ties of connexion and
relationship may exist, or at least did exist in the beginning
of time. They are, in fact, according to their opinions, only
the first among equals, the legitimate hereditary sovereigns
of the whole animated race, of which they are themselves a
constituent part. Hence, in their languages, those inflections
of their nouns which we call <emph>genders</emph>, are not, as with us,
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
descriptive of the <emph>masculine</emph> and <emph>feminine</emph> species, but of the
<emph>animate</emph> and <emph>inanimate</emph> kinds. Indeed, they go so far as to
include trees and plants within the first of these descriptions.
All animated nature, in whatever degree, is in their eyes a
great whole, from which they have not yet ventured to
separate themselves. They do not exclude other animals
from their world of spirits, the place to which they expect
to go after death.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. John Heckewelder, <q>An
Account of the History, Manners, and
Customs of the Indian Nations who
once inhabited Pennsylvania and the
neighbouring States,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of
the Historical and Literary Committee
of the American Philosophical Society</hi>,
vol. i. (Philadelphia, 1819) pp. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Even Chinese authors <q>have roundly
avowed themselves altogether unable to discover any real
difference between men and animals,</q> and they have drawn
out the parallelism between the two in some detail.<note place='foot'>J. J. M. de Groot, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of China</hi>, iv. (Leyden, 1901)
pp. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Some
savages
apparently
fail to distinguish
clearly even
the bodies
of animals
from the
bodies of
men.</note>
But it is not merely between the mental and spiritual
nature of man and the animals that the savage traces a
close resemblance; even the distinction of their bodily form
appears sometimes to elude his dull apprehension. An
unusually intelligent Bushman questioned by a missionary
<q>could not state any difference between a man and a brute&mdash;he
did not know but a buffalo might shoot with bows
and arrows as well as a man, if it had them.</q><note place='foot'>John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa, being a Narrative of a Second
Journey in the Interior of that Country</hi>
(London, 1822), ii. 34.</note> In the
opinion of the Gilyak, <q>the form and size of an animal are
merely a sort of appearance. Every animal is in point of
fact a real being like man, nay a Gilyak such as himself, but
endowed with reason and strength which often surpass those
of mere men.</q><note place='foot'>L. Sternberg, <q>Die Religion der
Giljaken,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
viii. (1905) p. 248.</note> Nor is it merely that in the mental fog the
savage takes beasts for men; he seems to be nearly as
ready to take himself and his fellows for beasts. When the
Russians first landed on one of the Alaskan islands the
people took them for cuttle-fish, <q>on account of the buttons
on their clothes.</q><note place='foot'>I. Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the Population,
Industries, and Resources of Alaska</hi>,
p. 145.</note> We have seen how some savages identify
themselves with animals of various sorts by eating the
maggots bred in the rotting carcases of the beasts, and how
thereafter, when occasion serves, they behave in their adopted
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
characters by wriggling, roaring, barking, or grunting, according
as they happen to be boa-constrictors, lions, jackals, or
hippopotamuses.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</note> In the island of Mabuiag men of the
Sam, that is, the Cassowary, totem think that cassowaries
are men or nearly so. <q>Sam he all same as relation, he
belong same family,</q> is the account they give of their kinship
with the creature. Conversely they hold that they themselves
are cassowaries, or at all events that they possess
some of the qualities of the long-legged bird. When a
Cassowary man went forth to reap laurels on the field of
battle, he used to reflect with satisfaction on the length of
his lower limbs: <q>My leg is long and thin, I can run and
not feel tired; my legs will go quickly and the grass will
not entangle them.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <q>The Ethnography
of the Western Tribe of Torres
Straits,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xix. (1890) p. 393; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Head-hunters</hi> (London, 1901), p. 133;
<hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits</hi>, v.
(Cambridge, 1904) p. 166.</note> Omaha Indians believe that between
a man and the creature which is his guardian spirit there
subsists so close a bond that the man acquires the powers
and qualities, the virtues and defects of the animal. Thus
if a man has seen a bear in that vision at puberty which
determines an Indian's guardian spirit, he will be apt to be
wounded in battle, because the bear is a slow and clumsy
animal and easily trapped. If he has dreamed of an eagle,
he will be able to see into the future and foretell coming
events, because the eagle's vision is keen and piercing.<note place='foot'>Miss Alice C. Fletcher, <hi rend='italic'>The Import
of the Totem, a Study from the Omaha
Tribe</hi>, p. 6 (paper read before the
American Association for the Advancement
of Science, August 1897).</note>
Similarly, the Thompson Indians of British Columbia
imagined that every man partook of the nature of the
animal which was his guardian spirit; for example, a man
who had the grisly bear for his protector would prove a
much fiercer warrior than one who had only a crow, a
coyote, or a fox for his guardian spirit. And before they
set out on the war-path these Indians used to perform a
mimic battle, in which each man, tricked out with paint and
feathers, imitated the sounds of the animal that was his
guardian spirit, grunting and whooping in character.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <q>The Thompson
Indians of British Columbia,</q> p. 356
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition.
Memoir of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>, April 1900).</note> The
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
Bororos, a tribe of Indians in the heart of Brazil, will have it
that they are parrots of a gorgeous red plumage which live
in the Brazilian forest. It is not merely that their souls will
pass into these birds at death, but they themselves are actually
identical with them in their life, and accordingly they treat
the parrots as they might treat their fellow-tribesmen, keeping
them in captivity, refusing to eat their flesh, and mourning
for them when they die. However, they kill the wild
birds for their feathers, and, though they will not kill, they
pluck the tame ones to deck their own naked brown bodies
with the gaudy plumage of their feathered brethren.<note place='foot'>K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi> (Berlin,
1894), pp. 352 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 512. The
Chambioa Indians of Central Brazil
kept birds of the same species in captivity
and used their brilliant feathers
to cover enormous head-dresses or
masks, some six feet high, which were
worn by dancers in certain mystic
dances. The masks were guarded in
a special hut of each village, and no
woman might see them under pain of
death. See F. de Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition
dans les parties centrales de l'Amérique
du Sud</hi> (Paris, 1850-1851), i.
436 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 440, 449-451.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence the
savage
attempts to
propitiate
the animals
which he
kills and
the other
members of
the species. Scruples
entertained
by the
Dyaks as
to the
killing of
crocodiles.</note>
Thus to the savage, who regards all living creatures as
practically on a footing of equality with man, the act of
killing and eating an animal must wear a very different
aspect from that which the same act presents to us, who
regard the intelligence of animals as far inferior to our own
and deny them the possession of immortal souls. Hence on
the principles of his rude philosophy the primitive hunter
who slays an animal believes himself exposed to the
vengeance either of its disembodied spirit or of all the other
animals of the same species, whom he considers as knit
together, like men, by the ties of kin and the obligations of
the blood feud, and therefore as bound to resent the injury
done to one of their number. Accordingly the savage makes
it a rule to spare the life of those animals which he has no
pressing motive for killing, at least such fierce and dangerous
animals as are likely to exact a bloody vengeance for the
slaughter of one of their kind. Crocodiles are animals of
this sort. They are only found in hot countries, where, as a
rule, food is abundant and primitive man has therefore little
reason to kill them for the sake of their tough and unpalatable
flesh.<note place='foot'>However, many savages hunt the
crocodile for the sake of its flesh,
which some of them even regard as a
delicacy. See H. von Wissmann, <hi rend='italic'>My
Second Journey through Equatorial
Africa, from the Congo to the Zambesi</hi>
(London, 1891), p. 298; Ch. Partridge,
<hi rend='italic'>Cross River Natives</hi> (London,
1905), p. 149; A. F. Mocler-Ferryman,
<hi rend='italic'>Up the Niger</hi> (London, 1892),
p. 222; Captain G. Burrows, <hi rend='italic'>The Land
of the Pigmies</hi> (London, 1898), p. 247;
R. E. Dennett, "Bavili Notes," <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xvi. (1905) p. 399; J. Halkin,
<hi rend='italic'>Quelques Peuplades du district de l'Uelé</hi>,
I. <hi rend='italic'>Les Ababua</hi> (Liége, 1907), p. 33;
H. Reynolds, <q>Notes on the Azandé
Tribe of the Congo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
African Society</hi>, No. xi. (April, 1904)
p. 242; Brard, <q>Der Victoria-Nyansa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Petermann's Mittheilungen</hi>, xliii. (1897)
p. 78; A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et Totémisme
à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), p.
209; G. Kurze, <q>Sitten und Gebräuche
der Lengua-Indianer,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen
der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>,
xxiii. (1905) p. 30; W. Barbrooke
Grubb, <hi rend='italic'>An unknown People in an unknown
Land</hi> (London, 1911), pp. 82
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Census of India, 1901</hi>, vol. xxvi.,
<hi rend='italic'>Travancore</hi> (Trivandrum, 1903), p.
353; Max Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi> (Berlin,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 163; Spencer and Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1904), p. 770; W. E. Roth,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethnological Studies among the North-West-Central
Queensland Aborigines</hi>
(Brisbane and London, 1897), p. 94;
N. W. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Natives of Australia</hi>
(London, 1906), p. 106. In antiquity
some of the Egyptians worshipped
crocodiles, but others killed and ate
them. See Herodotus, ii. 69; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 50; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>De
natura animalium</hi>, x. 21.</note> Hence it is a custom with some savages
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
to spare crocodiles, or rather only to kill them in obedience
to the law of blood feud, that is, as a retaliation for the
slaughter of men by crocodiles. For example, the Dyaks of
Borneo will not kill a crocodile unless a crocodile has first
killed a man. <q>For why, say they, should they commit an
act of aggression, when he and his kindred can so easily
repay them? But should the alligator take a human life,
revenge becomes a sacred duty of the living relatives, who
will trap the man-eater in the spirit of an officer of justice
pursuing a criminal. Others, even then, hang back, reluctant
to embroil themselves in a quarrel which does not concern
them. The man-eating alligator is supposed to be pursued
by a righteous Nemesis; and whenever one is caught they
have a profound conviction that it must be the guilty one,
or his accomplice.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Perham, <q>Sea Dyak
Religion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 10
(Singapore, 1883), p. 221. Compare
C. Hupe, <q>Korte verhandeling over
de godsdienst zeden, enz. der Dajakkers,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</hi>,
1846, dl. iii. 160; S. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Reizen
en onderzoekingen in den Indischen
Archipel</hi> (Amsterdam, 1857), i. 238;
M. T. H. Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Beschrijving der Dajaks</hi> (Zalt-Bommel,
1870), p. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Dyaks at
killing a
crocodile.</note>
When a Dyak has made up his mind to take vengeance
on the crocodiles for the death of a kinsman, he calls in
the help of a Pangareran, a man whose business it is to
charm and catch crocodiles and to make them do his
will. While he is engaged in the discharge of his professional
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
duties the crocodile-catcher has to observe a
number of odd rules. He may not go to anybody and may
not even pass in front of a window, because he is unclean.
He may not himself cook anything nor come near a fire.
If he would eat fruit, he may not peel or husk it himself,
but must get others to do it for him. He may not even
chew his food, but is obliged to swallow it unchewed. A
little hut is made for him on the bank of the river, where he
uses divination by means of the figure of a crocodile drawn
on a piece of bamboo for the purpose of determining whether
his undertaking will prosper. The boat in which he embarks
to catch the wicked man-eating crocodile must be
painted yellow and red, and in the middle of it lances are
erected with the points upward. Then the man of skill
casts lots to discover whether the hook is to be baited with
pork, or venison, or the flesh of a dog or an ass. In throwing
the baited hook into the water he calls out: <q>Ye
crocodiles who are up stream, come down; and ye crocodiles
who are down stream, come up; for I will give you all good
food, as sweet as sugar and as fat as coco-nut. I will give
you a pretty and beautiful necklace. When you have got
it, keep it in your neck and body, for this food is very
<foreign rend='italic'>pahuni</foreign>,</q> which means that it would be sinful not to eat it.
If a crocodile bites at the hook, the crocodile-catcher
bawls out, <q>Choose a place for yourself where you will lie;
for many men are come to see you. They are come joyfully
and exultingly, and they give you a knife, a lance, and
a shroud.</q> If the crocodile is a female, he addresses her as
<q>Princess</q>; if it is a male, he calls it <q>Prince.</q> The enchanter,
who is generally a cunning Malay, must continue his
operations till he catches a crocodile in which traces are to be
found shewing that the animal has indeed devoured a human
being. Then the death of the man is atoned for, and in order
not to offend the water-spirits a cat is sacrificed to the crocodiles.
The heads of the dead crocodiles are fastened on stakes
beside the river, where in time they bleach white and stand out
sharply against the green background of the forest.<note place='foot'>F. Grabowsky, <q>Die Theogonie
der Dajaken auf Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>,
ii. (1892) pp. 119 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> While
the captured crocodile is being hauled in to the bank, the
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
subtle Dyaks speak softly to him and beguile him into offering
no resistance; but once they have him fast, with arms and
legs securely pinioned, they howl at him and deride him for
his credulity, while they rip up the belly of the infuriated
and struggling brute to find the evidence of his guilt in the
shape of human remains. On one occasion Rajah Brooke
of Sarawak was present at a discussion among a party of
Dyaks as to how they ought to treat a captured crocodile.
One side maintained that it was proper to bestow all praise
and honour on the kingly beast, since he was himself a rajah
among animals and was now brought there to meet the rajah;
in short, they held that praise and flattery were agreeable to
him and would put him on his best behaviour. The other side
fully admitted that on this occasion rajah met rajah; yet with
prudent foresight they pointed to the dangerous consequences
which might flow from establishing a precedent such as
their adversaries contended for. If once a captured crocodile,
said they, were praised and honoured, the other crocodiles,
on hearing of it, would be puffed up with pride and ambition,
and being seized with a desire to emulate the glory of their
fellow would enter on a career of man-eating as the road
likely to lead them by the shortest cut to the temple of fame.<note place='foot'>H. Ling Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of
Sarawak and British North Borneo</hi>
(London, 1896), i. 447 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare E.
H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>Seventeen years among the
Sea Dyaks of Borneo</hi> (London, 1911), pp.
56-60. Similarly the Kenyahs, Kayans,
and Ibans, three tribes of Sarawak, will
not kill crocodiles except in revenge
for the death of one of their people.
See C. Hose and W. MacDougall,
<q>The Relations between Men and
Animals in Sarawak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901)
pp. 186, 190, 199, compare <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> pp.
193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
Minangkabauers
of
Sumatra at
killing a
crocodile.</note>
The Minangkabauers of Sumatra have also a great
respect for crocodiles. Their celebrated law-giver Katoemanggoengan
was indeed born again in the form of a
crocodile; and thus his descendants, including the rajah of
Indrapoera and his family, are more or less distant cousins
of the crocodiles, and enjoy the help and protection of the
creatures in many ways, for example when they go on a journey.
The respect entertained for the animals is also attested
by the ceremonies observed in some places when a crocodile
has been caught. A crowd of women then performs certain
dances which closely resemble the dances performed when
somebody has died. Moreover, it is a rule with the
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
Minangkabauers that no cooking-pot may be washed in a
river; to do so would be like offering the crocodiles the
leavings of your food, and they would very naturally resent
it. For the same reason in washing up the dinner or
supper plates you must be careful not to make a splashing,
or the crocodiles would hear it and take umbrage.<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het animisme
bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890)
pp. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the kinship
of men with
crocodiles
among the
Malays.</note>
Among the Malays of Patani Bay, in Siam, there is a
family whose members may not kill a crocodile nor even
be present when one of these ferocious reptiles is captured.
The reason alleged for this forbearance is that the family
claim kindred with a woman named Betimor, who was
drowned in the river and afterwards turned into a crocodile.
After her transformation she appeared to her father in a
dream and told him what had become of her; so he went
down to the river and made offerings to her of rice and wax
tapers. There is a shrine on the spot where the woman was
transformed into a crocodile, and any one may dedicate
offerings there and pray to Toh Sri Lam; for so she has
been called ever since her metamorphosis. Members of the
crocodile family call on her for help in sickness and other
misfortunes, and they will do so on behalf of other people
for a proper consideration. Rice and wax tapers are the
usual offerings.<note place='foot'>Nelson Annandale, <q>Primitive
Beliefs and Customs of the Patani
Fishermen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fasciculi Malayenses,
Anthropology</hi>, i. (April, 1903) pp.
76-78.</note> In many islands of the Indian Archipelago,
including Java, Sumatra, Celebes, Timor, and Ceram, this
belief in a kinship of men with crocodiles assumes a
peculiar form. The people imagine that women are often
delivered of a child and a crocodile at the same birth, and
that when this happens, the midwife carries the crocodile
twin carefully down to the river and places it in the water.
The family in which such a birth is thought to have
happened, constantly put victuals into the river for their
amphibious relation; and in particular the human twin,
so long as he lives, goes down to the river at stated
seasons to do his duty by his crocodile brother or sister;
and if he were to fail to do so, it is the universal opinion
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
that he would be visited with sickness or death for his
unnatural conduct. Large parties of these crocodile people
periodically go out in a boat furnished with great plenty of
provisions and all kinds of music, and they row backwards
and forwards, with the music playing, in places where crocodiles
do most abound. As they do so they sing and weep
by turns, each of them invoking his animal kinsfolk, till
the snout of one of the brutes bobbs up from the water,
whereupon the music stops, and food, betel, and tobacco
are thrown into the river. By these delicate attentions
they hope to recommend themselves to the formidable
creatures.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Voyages of Captain James Cook
round the World</hi> (London, 1809), ii.
316-319.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crocodiles
respected
in Africa.</note>
The crocodiles about the island of Damba in the
Victoria Nyanza were sacred and might not be molested in
any way. Hence they multiplied and became dangerous;
people made offerings to them in the hope of being spared
by the monsters when they crossed in the ferries. From
time to time batches of men were brought down to the
beach and sacrificed to the crocodiles. Their arms and legs
were broken so that they could not stir from the spot;
then they were laid out in a row on the shore, and the
crocodiles came and dragged them into the water. On the
island there was a temple dedicated to the crocodiles, and
here an inspired medium resided who gave oracular responses.
Under the influence of the spirit he wagged his head from
side to side, opening his jaws and snapping them together,
just as a crocodile does.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 336.</note> No doubt the spirit which
possessed him in these moments of fine frenzy was supposed
to be that of a crocodile. Similarly in other parts of
Uganda men were inspired by the ghosts or spirits of lions,
leopards, and serpents, and in that state of exaltation they
uttered oracles, roaring like a lion, growling like a leopard,
or grovelling and wriggling like a serpent, according to
the nature of the spirit by which they were possessed.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 318,
322, 335.</note>
Crocodiles abound in the Albert Nyanza Lake and its
tributaries. In many places they are extremely dangerous,
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
but the Alur tribe of that region only hunt them when they
have dragged away a man; and they think that any one
who has taken away a crocodile's eggs must be on his guard
when he walks near the bank of the river, for the crocodiles
will try to avenge the injury by seizing him.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894), pp.
510 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In general
the Foulahs of Senegambia dare not kill a crocodile from
fear of provoking the vengeance of the relations and friends
of the murdered reptile; but if the sorcerer gives his consent
and passes his word that he will guarantee them against the
vengeance of the family of the deceased, they will pluck up
courage to attack one of the brutes.<note place='foot'>A. Raffenel, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Afrique
occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1846), pp. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crocodiles
respected in
Madagascar.</note>
Like the Dyaks, the natives of Madagascar never kill a
crocodile <q>except in retaliation for one of their friends who
has been destroyed by a crocodile. They believe that the
wanton destruction of one of these reptiles will be followed
by the loss of human life, in accordance with the principle of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lex talionis</foreign>.</q> The people who live near the lake Itasy in
Madagascar make a yearly proclamation to the crocodiles,
announcing that they will revenge the death of some of their
friends by killing as many crocodiles in return, and warning
all well-disposed crocodiles to keep out of the way, as they
have no quarrel with them, but only with their evil-minded
relations who have taken human life.<note place='foot'>J. Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African
Island</hi> (London, 1880), p. 269.</note> Various tribes of
Madagascar believe themselves to be descended from crocodiles,
and accordingly they view the scaly reptile as, to all
intents and purposes, a man and a brother. If one of the
animals should so far forget himself as to devour one of his
human kinsfolk, the chief of the tribe, or in his absence an
old man familiar with the tribal customs, repairs at the head
of the people to the edge of the water, and summons the
family of the culprit to deliver him up to the arm of justice.
A hook is then baited and cast into the river or lake. Next
day the guilty brother, or one of his family, is dragged ashore,
and after his crime has been clearly brought home to him by
a strict interrogation, he is sentenced to death and executed.
The claims of justice being thus satisfied and the majesty of
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
the law fully vindicated, the deceased crocodile is lamented
and buried like a kinsman; a mound is raised over his relics
and a stone marks the place of his head.<note place='foot'>Father Abinal, <q>Croyances fabuleuses
des Malgaches,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xii. (1880) p. 527; A.
van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et Totémisme à
Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904), pp. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Malagasy,
indeed, regard the crocodile with superstitious veneration as
the king of the waters and supreme in his own element.
When they are about to cross a river they pronounce a
solemn oath, or enter into an engagement to acknowledge
his sovereignty over the waters. An aged native has been
known to covenant with the crocodiles for nearly half an
hour before plunging into the stream. After that he lifted
up his voice and addressed the animal, urging him to do
him no harm, since he had never hurt the crocodile;
assuring him that he had never made war on any of his
fellows, but on the contrary had always entertained the
highest veneration for him; and adding that if he wantonly
attacked him, vengeance would follow sooner or later; while
if the crocodile devoured him, his relations and all his race
would declare war against the beast. This harangue occupied
another quarter of an hour, after which the orator dashed
fearlessly into the stream.<note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of Madagascar</hi>
(London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), i. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tigers
respected in
Sumatra. Ceremonies
at killing
tigers in
Sumatra
and
Bengal.</note>
Again, the tiger is another of those dangerous beasts
whom the savage prefers to leave alone, lest by killing one of
the species he should excite the hostility of the rest. No
consideration will induce a Sumatran to catch or wound
a tiger except in self-defence or immediately after a tiger
has destroyed a friend or relation. When a European has
set traps for tigers, the people of the neighbourhood have
been known to go by night to the place and explain to the
animals that the traps are not set by them nor with their
consent.<note place='foot'>W. Marsden, <hi rend='italic'>History of Sumatra</hi>
(London, 1811), p. 292.</note> If it is necessary to kill a tiger which has wrought
much harm in the village, the Minangkabauers of Sumatra
try to catch him alive in order to beg for his forgiveness
before despatching him, and in ordinary life they will not
speak evil of him or do anything that might displease him.
For example, they will not use a path that has been untrodden
for more than a year, because the tiger has chosen
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
that path for himself, and would deem it a mark of disrespect
were any one else to use it. Again, persons journeying
by night will not walk one behind the other, nor keep
looking about them, for the tiger would think that this
betrayed fear of him, and his feelings would be hurt by the
suspicion. Neither will they travel bareheaded, for that also
would be disrespectful to the tiger; nor will they knock off
the glowing end of a firebrand, for the flying sparks are like
the tiger's glistering eyes, and he would treat this as an
attempt to mimic him.<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het animisme
bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890) pp.
74, 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The population of Mandeling,
a district on the west coast of Sumatra, is divided into clans,
one of which claims to be descended from a tiger. It is
believed that the animal will not attack or rend the members
of this clan, because they are his kinsmen. When members
of the clan come upon the tracks of a tiger, they enclose
them with three little sticks as a mark of homage; and when
a tiger has been shot, the women of the clan are bound
to offer betel to the dead beast.<note place='foot'>H. Ris, <q>De onderafdeeling Mandailing
Oeloe en Pahantan en hare
Bevolking,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch
Indië</hi>, xlvi. (1896) pp. 472
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Battas of Sumatra
seldom kill a tiger except from motives of revenge, observing
the rule an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, or, as
they express it, <q>He who owes gold must pay in gold;
he who owes breath (that is, life) must pay with breath.</q>
Nor can the beast be attacked without some ceremony;
only weapons that have proved themselves able to kill may
be used for the purpose. When the tiger has been killed,
they bring the carcase to the village, set offerings before
it, and burn incense over it, praying the spirit of the tiger to
quit its material envelope and enter the incense pot. As
soon as the soul may be supposed to have complied with
this request, a speaker explains to the spirits in general
the reasons for killing the tiger, and begs them to set forth
these reasons to the departed soul of the beast, lest the latter
should be angry and the people should suffer in consequence.
Then they dance round the dead body of the tiger till they
can dance no longer, after which they skin the carcase and
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
bury it.<note place='foot'>G. G. Batten, <hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of the
Eastern Archipelago</hi> (Singapore, 1894),
p. 86.</note> The inhabitants of the hills near Rajamahall, in
Bengal, believe that if any man kills a tiger without divine
orders, either he or one of his relations will be devoured by
a tiger. Hence they are very averse to killing a tiger,
unless one of their kinsfolk has been carried off by one of
the beasts. In that case they go out for the purpose of
hunting and slaying a tiger; and when they have succeeded
they lay their bows and arrows on the carcase and invoke
God, declaring that they slew the animal in retaliation for
the loss of a kinsman. Vengeance having been thus taken,
they swear not to attack another tiger except under similar
provocation.<note place='foot'>Th. Shaw, <q>On the Inhabitants
of the Hills near Rajamahall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Asiatic
Researches</hi>, Fourth Edition, iv. (London,
1807) p. 37.</note> The natives of Cochin China have a great
respect for the tiger, whom they regard as a terrible divinity.
Yet they set traps for him and leave no stone unturned to
catch him. Once he is ensnared, they offer him their excuses
and condolences for the painful position in which he finds
himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Annales de l'Association de la Propagation
de la Foi</hi>, v. (1831) pp. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Snakes,
especially
rattlesnakes,
respected
by the
North
American
Indians.</note>
The Indians of Carolina would not molest snakes when
they came upon them, but would pass by on the other side
of the path, believing that if they were to kill a serpent, the
reptile's kindred would destroy some of their brethren, friends,
or relations in return.<note place='foot'>J. Bricknell, <hi rend='italic'>The Natural History
of North Carolina</hi> (Dublin, 1737), p.
368.</note> So the Seminole Indians spared
the rattlesnake, because they feared that the soul of the
dead rattlesnake would incite its kinsfolk to take vengeance.
Once when a rattlesnake appeared in their camp they
entreated an English traveller to rid them of the creature.
When he had killed it, they were glad but tried to scratch
him as a means of appeasing the spirit of the dead snake.<note place='foot'>W. Bartram, <hi rend='italic'>Travels through
North and South Carolina, Georgia,
East and West Florida</hi>, etc. (London,
1792) pp. 258-261.</note>
Soon after the Iowas began to build their village near the
mouth of Wolf River, a lad came into the village and
reported that he had seen a rattlesnake on a hill not far off.
A medicine-man immediately repaired to the spot, and finding
the snake made it presents of tobacco and other things
which he had brought with him for the purpose. He also
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
had a long talk with the animal, and on returning to his
people told them that now they might travel about in safety,
for peace had been made with the snakes.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi> (Philadelphia,
1853-1856), iii. 273.</note> The Delaware
Indians also paid great respect to the rattlesnake, whom
they called their grandfather, and they would on no account
destroy one of the reptiles. They said that the rattlesnake
guarded them and gave them notice of impending danger
by his rattle, and that if they were to kill a rattlesnake, the
rest of the species would soon hear of it and bite the Indians
in revenge.<note place='foot'>Rev. John Heckewelder, <q>An
Account of the History, Manners,
and Customs of the Indian Nations
who once inhabited Pennsylvania and
the neighbouring States,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions
of the Historical and Literary Committee
of the American Philosophical
Society</hi>, i. (Philadelphia, 1819) p. 245.</note> The Potawatomi Indians highly venerated the
rattlesnake for a similar reason, being grateful to it for the
timely warning which it often gave of the approach of an
enemy. Yet a young man who desired to obtain a rattle
would have no hesitation in killing one of the snakes for the
purpose; but he apologised profusely to the creature for the
liberty he took with it, explaining that he required the rattle
for the adornment of his person, and that no disrespect was
intended to the snake; and in proof of his good will he
would leave a piece of tobacco beside the carcase.<note place='foot'>W. Keating, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of an
Expedition to the Source of St. Peter's
River</hi> (London, 1825), i. 127.</note> The
Cherokee regard the rattlesnake as the chief of the snake
tribe and fear and respect him accordingly. Few Cherokee
will venture to kill a rattlesnake, unless they cannot help it,
and even then they must atone for the crime by craving
pardon of the snake's ghost either in their own person or
through the mediation of a priest, according to a set formula.
If these precautions are neglected, the kinsfolk of the dead
snake will send one of their number as an avenger of blood,
who will track down the murderer and sting him to death.
It is absolutely necessary to cut off the snake's head and
bury it deep in the earth and to hide the body in a hollow
log; for if the remains were exposed to the weather, the
other snakes would be so angry that they would send
torrents of rain and all the streams would overflow their
banks. If a Cherokee dreams of being bitten by a snake,
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
he must be treated in exactly the same way as if he had
been really bitten; for they think that he has actually been
bitten by the ghost of a snake, and that if the proper
remedies were not applied to the hurt, the place would swell
and ulcerate, though possibly not for years afterwards.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1900) pp. 294-296.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, pp. 456-458;
J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi> (London, 1775), pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Once when an Englishman attempted to kill a rattlesnake,
a party of Ojibway Indians, with whom he was travelling,
begged him to desist, and endeavoured to appease the snake,
addressing it in turns as grandfather, smoking over it, and
beseeching it to take care of their families in their absence,
and to open the heart of the British Agent so that he should
fill their canoe with rum. A storm which overtook them
next day on Lake Huron was attributed by them to the
wrath of the insulted rattlesnake, and they sought to mollify
him by throwing dogs as sacrifices to him into the waves.<note place='foot'>Henry, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, pp. 176-179,
quoted by J. Mooney, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
457 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Kekchi Indians of Guatemala will not throw serpents
or scorpions into the fire, lest the other creatures of the same
species should punish them for the outrage.<note place='foot'>C. Sapper, <q>Die Gebräuche und
religiösen Anschauungen der Kekchí-Indianer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, viii. (1895) p. 204.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed in
Kiziba at
the killing
of a snake.</note>
In Kiziba, a district of Central Africa, to the west of Lake
Victoria Nyanza, if a woman accidentally kills a snake with
her hoe while she is working in the field, she hastens in
great agitation to the snake-priest and hands him over the
hoe, together with two strings of cowries and an ox-hide,
begging him to appease the angry spirit of the slain serpent.
In this application she is accompanied and supported by all
the villagers, who share her fears and anxiety. Accordingly
the priest beats his drum as a sign that no woman of the
village is to work in the fields till further notice. Next he
wraps the dead serpent in a piece of the ox-hide and buries
it solemnly. On the following day he performs a ceremony of
purification for the slaughter of the reptile. He compounds
a medicine out of the guts of a leopard or hyaena and
earth or mud dissolved in water, and with this mixture
he disinfects all the houses in the village, beginning with
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
the house of the woman who killed the serpent. Next he
proceeds to the fields, where all the women of the village
have collected their hoes. These he purifies by dipping
them in the fluid and then twirling them about so as to
make the drops of water fly off. From that moment the
danger incurred by the slaughter of the reptile is averted.
The spirit of the serpent is appeased, and the women may
resume their usual labours in the fields.<note place='foot'>H. Rehse, <hi rend='italic'>Kiziba, Land und
Leute</hi> (Stuttgart, 1910), pp. 130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
by the
North
American
Indians
and others
at the
killing of
a wolf.</note>
When the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia have
slain a wolf they lay the carcase on a blanket and take out
the heart, of which every person who helped to kill the beast
must eat four morsels. Then they wail over the body, saying,
<q>Woe! our great friend!</q> After that they cover the carcase
with a blanket and bury it. A bow or gun that killed a wolf
is regarded as unlucky, and the owner gives it away. These
Indians believe that the slaying of a wolf produces a scarcity
of game.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>,
pp. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint from the
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1896</hi>).</note> When the Tinneh Indians of Central Alaska have
killed a wolf or a wolverine, the carcase is brought into the
camp or village with great pomp. The people go forth to
meet it, saying, <q>The chief is coming.</q> Then the body is
carried into a hut and propped up in a sitting posture; and
the medicine-man spreads before it a copious banquet, to
which every family in the village has contributed of its best.
When the dead animal is supposed to have satisfied his
hunger, the men consume the remains of the feast, but no
woman is allowed to participate in what has been thus offered
to the wolf or the wolverine.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Jetté, <q>On the Medicine-men
of the Ten'a,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvii.
(1907) p. 158.</note> No ordinary Cherokee dares
to kill a wolf, if he can possibly help it; for he believes that
the kindred of the slain beast would surely avenge its death,
and that the weapon with which the deed had been done
would be quite useless for the future, unless it were cleaned
and exorcised by a medicine-man. However, certain persons
who know the proper rites of atonement for such a crime
can kill wolves with impunity, and they are sometimes hired
to do so by people who have suffered from the raids of the
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
wolves on their cattle or fish-traps. The professional wolf-killer
prays to the animal whom he has bereaved of life, and
seeks to avert the vengeance of the other wolves by laying
the blame of the slaughter on the people of another settlement.
To purify the gun which has perpetrated the murder,
he unscrews the barrel, inserts into it seven small sour-wood
rods which have been heated in the fire, and then allows the
barrel and its contents to lie in a running stream till morning.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 265.</note>
When the Chuckchees of north-eastern Siberia have killed a
wolf, they hold a festival, at which they cry, <q>Wolf, be not
angry with us. It was not we who killed you, it was the
Russians who destroyed you.</q><note place='foot'>T. de Pauly, <hi rend='italic'>Description Ethnographique
des Peuples de la Russie</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1862), <hi rend='italic'>Peuples de la
Sibérie Orientale</hi>, p. 7.</note> In ancient Athens any man
who killed a wolf had to bury it by subscription.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius,
<hi rend='italic'>Argonaut.</hi> ii. 124.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Certain
birds
respected.</note>
In Jebel-Nuba, a district of the eastern Sudan, it is forbidden
to touch the nests or remove the young of a species of black
birds, resembling our blackbirds, because the people believe that
the parent birds would avenge the wrong by causing a stormy
wind to blow, which would destroy the harvest.<note place='foot'><q>Coutumes étranges des indigènes
du Djebel-Nouba,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xiv. (1882) p. 458.</note> Some of
the Sudanese negroes of Upper Egypt regard the great black
raven (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Corvus umbrinus</foreign>) as their uncle and exact pecuniary
compensation or blood-money from any one who has been
so rash as to slay their sable relative. Having satisfied their
scruples on that head, they give the bird a solemn burial,
carrying the corpse to the graveyard on a bier with flags and
shouts of <foreign lang='ar' rend='italic'>la ill Allah</foreign>, just as if they were interring one of
their kinsfolk.<note place='foot'>C. B. Klunzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Upper Egypt</hi>
(London, 1878), pp. 402 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Palenques of South America are very
careful to spare harmless animals which are not good for food;
because they believe that any injury inflicted on such creatures
would entail the sickness or death of their own children.<note place='foot'>Caulin, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Coro-graphica
natural y evangelica dela Nueva Andalucia</hi>,
p. 96: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Reusan mucho matar
qualquier animal no comestibile que no
sea nocibo</foreign>,</q> etc. Here <foreign rend='italic'>reusan</foreign> appears
to be a misprint for <foreign rend='italic'>recusan</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Apologies
offered by
savages to
the animals
which they
are obliged
to kill.
Propitiation
of
slain bears
by Kamtchatkans,
Ostiaks,
Koryak,
Finns, and
Lapps.</note>
But the savage clearly cannot afford to spare all animals.
He must either eat some of them or starve, and when the
question thus comes to be whether he or the animal must
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
perish, he is forced to overcome his superstitious scruples
and take the life of the beast. At the same time he does
all he can to appease his victims and their kinsfolk. Even
in the act of killing them he testifies his respect for them,
endeavours to excuse or even conceal his share in procuring
their death, and promises that their remains will be honourably
treated. By thus robbing death of its terrors he hopes
to reconcile his victims to their fate and to induce their
fellows to come and be killed also. For example, it was a
principle with the Kamtchatkans never to kill a land or sea
animal without first making excuses to it and begging that
the animal would not take it ill. Also they offered it cedar-nuts
and so forth, to make it think that it was not a victim
but a guest at a feast. They believed that this hindered
other animals of the same species from growing shy. For
instance, after they had killed a bear and feasted on its
flesh, the host would bring the bear's head before the company,
wrap it in grass, and present it with a variety of trifles.
Then he would lay the blame of the bear's death on the
Russians, and bid the beast wreak his wrath upon them.
Also he would ask the bear to inform the other bears how
well he had been treated, that they too might come without
fear. Seals, sea-lions, and other animals were treated by the
Kamtchatkans with the same ceremonious respect. Moreover,
they used to insert sprigs of a plant resembling bear's
wort in the mouths of the animals they killed; after which
they would exhort the grinning skulls to have no fear but
to go and tell it to their fellows, that they also might come
and be caught and so partake of this splendid hospitality.<note place='foot'>G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von dem Lande Kamtschatka</hi> (Frankfort and
Leipsic, 1774), pp. 85, 280, 331.</note>
When the Ostiaks have hunted and killed a bear, they cut
off its head and hang it on a tree. Then they gather round
in a circle and pay it divine honours. Next they run
towards the carcase uttering lamentations and saying, <q>Who
killed you? It was the Russians. Who cut off your head?
It was a Russian axe. Who skinned you? It was a knife
made by a Russian.</q> They explain, too, that the feathers
which sped the arrow on its flight came from the wing of a
strange bird, and that they did nothing but let the arrow go.
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
They do all this because they believe that the wandering
ghost of the slain bear would attack them on the first opportunity,
if they did not thus appease it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Voyages au Nord</hi> (Amsterdam,
1727), viii. 41, 416; P. S. Pallas,
<hi rend='italic'>Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des
russischen Reichs</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1771-1776),
iii. 64; J. G. Georgi, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
aller Nationen des russischen
Reichs</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1776), p. 83.</note> Or they stuff the
skin of the slain bear with hay; and after celebrating their
victory with songs of mockery and insult, after spitting on
and kicking it, they set it up on its hind legs, <q>and then, for
a considerable time, they bestow on it all the veneration due
to a guardian god.</q><note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Siberia</hi>
(London, 1848), ii. 43. For the
veneration of the polar bear by the
Samoyedes, who nevertheless kill and
eat it, see ib<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a party of Koryak have killed
a bear or a wolf, they skin the beast and dress one of themselves
in the skin. Then they dance round the skin-clad
man, saying that it was not they who killed the animal, but
some one else, generally a Russian. When they kill a fox
they skin it, wrap the body in grass, and bid him go tell his
companions how hospitably he has been received, and how
he has received a new cloak instead of his old one.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Der Mensch in der
Geschichte</hi> (Leipsic, 1860), iii. 26.</note> A
fuller account of the Koryak ceremonies is given by a more
recent writer. He tells us that when a dead bear is brought
to the house, the women come out to meet it dancing with
firebrands. The bear-skin is taken off along with the head;
and one of the women puts on the skin, dances in it, and
entreats the bear not to be angry, but to be kind to the
people. At the same time they offer meat on a wooden
platter to the dead beast, saying, <q>Eat, friend.</q> Afterwards
a ceremony is performed for the purpose of sending the dead
bear, or rather his spirit, away back to his home. He is
provided with provisions for the journey in the shape of
puddings or reindeer-flesh packed in a grass bag. His skin
is stuffed with grass and carried round the house, after which
he is supposed to depart towards the rising sun. The intention
of the ceremonies is to protect the people from the
wrath of the slain bear and his kinsfolk, and so to ensure
success in future bear-hunts.<note place='foot'>W. Jochelson, <hi rend='italic'>The Koryak</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1908), pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. vi., <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History</hi>).</note> The Finns used to try to
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
persuade a slain bear that he had not been killed by them,
but had fallen from a tree, or met his death in some other
way;<note place='foot'>Max Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wotjäken</hi> (Stuttgart,
1882), p. 139.</note> moreover, they held a funeral festival in his honour,
at the close of which bards expatiated on the homage that
had been paid to him, urging him to report to the other
bears the high consideration with which he had been treated,
in order that they also, following his example, might come
and be slain.<note place='foot'>A. Featherman, <hi rend='italic'>Social History of
the Races of Mankind, Fourth Division,
Dravido-Turanians</hi>, etc. (London,
1891) p. 422.</note> When the Lapps had succeeded in killing a
bear with impunity, they thanked him for not hurting them
and for not breaking the clubs and spears which had given
him his death wounds; and they prayed that he would not
visit his death upon them by sending storms or in any other
way. His flesh then furnished a feast.<note place='foot'>J. Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi> (Frankfort,
1673), pp. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Lapps <q>have
still an elaborate ceremony in hunting
the bear. They pray and chant to his
carcase, and for several days worship
before eating it</q> (E. Rae, <hi rend='italic'>The White
Sea Peninsula</hi> (London, 1881), p. 276).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of
slain bears
by the
North
American
Indians.</note>
The reverence of hunters for the bear whom they
regularly kill and eat may thus be traced all along the
northern region of the Old World, from Bering's Straits
to Lappland. It reappears in similar forms in North
America. With the American Indians a bear hunt was
an important event for which they prepared by long fasts
and purgations. Before setting out they offered expiatory
sacrifices to the souls of bears slain in previous hunts, and
besought them to be favourable to the hunters. When a
bear was killed the hunter lit his pipe, and putting the
mouth of it between the bear's lips, blew into the bowl,
filling the beast's mouth with smoke. Then he begged the
bear not to be angry at having been killed, and not to
thwart him afterwards in the chase. The carcase was
roasted whole and eaten; not a morsel of the flesh might
be left over. The head, painted red and blue, was hung
on a post and addressed by orators, who heaped praise on
the dead beast.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi> (Paris, 1744), v. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Chateaubriand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>,
pp. 172-181 (Paris, Michel Lévy,
1870).</note> When men of the Bear clan in the Otawa
tribe killed a bear, they made him a feast of his own flesh,
and addressed him thus: <q>Cherish us no grudge because we
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
have killed you. You have sense; you see that our children
are hungry. They love you and wish to take you into their
bodies. Is it not glorious to be eaten by the children
of a chief?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>,
Nouvelle Édition, vi. (Paris, 1781) p.
171. L. H. Morgan states that the
names of the Otawa totem clans had
not been obtained (<hi rend='italic'>Ancient Society</hi>,
London, 1877, p. 167). From the
<hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes</hi>, vi. 168-171, he might
have learned the names of the Hare,
Carp, and Bear clans, to which may
be added the Gull clan, as I learn from
an extract from <hi rend='italic'>The Canadian Journal</hi>
(Toronto) for March 1858, quoted in
<hi rend='italic'>The Academy</hi>, 27th September 1884,
p. 203.</note> Amongst the Nootka Indians of British
Columbia, when a bear had been killed, it was brought in
and seated before the head chief in an upright posture, with
a chief's bonnet, wrought in figures, on its head, and its fur
powdered over with white down. A tray of provisions was
then set before it, and it was invited by words and gestures
to eat. After that the animal was skinned, boiled, and
eaten.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Narrative of the Adventures
and Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi>, p.
117 (Middletown, 1820), p. 133 (Edinburgh,
1824).</note> The Assiniboins pray to the bear and offer sacrifices
to it of tobacco, belts, and other valuable objects. Moreover,
they hold feasts in its honour, that they may win the
beast's favour and live safe and sound. The bear's head is
often kept in camp for several days mounted in some suitable
position and decked with scraps of scarlet cloth, necklaces,
collars, and coloured feathers. They offer the pipe to
it, and pray that they may be able to kill all the bears they
meet, without harm to themselves, for the purpose of anointing
themselves with his fine grease and banqueting on his
tender flesh.<note place='foot'>De Smet, <hi rend='italic'>Western Missions and
Missionaries</hi> (New York, 1863), p. 139.</note> The Ojibways will not suffer dogs to eat the
flesh or gnaw the bones of a bear, and they throw all the
waste portions into the fire. They think that if the flesh
were desecrated, they would have no luck in hunting bears
thereafter.<note place='foot'>A. P. Reid, <q>Religious Belief of
the Ojibois Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, iii. (1874)
p. 111.</note> A trader of the eighteenth century has described
the endearments which a party of Ojibways lavished on a
she-bear which he had just killed. They took her head in
their hands, stroked it and kissed it, and begged a thousand
pardons for her violent death; they called her their relation
and grandmother, and begged her not to lay the fault at
their door, for indeed it was an Englishman who had killed
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
her. Having severed the head from the body, they adorned
it with all the trinkets they could muster and set it up on a
scaffold in the lodge. Next day pipes were lit and tobacco
smoke blown into the nostrils of the dead bear, and the
trader was invited to pay this mark of respect to the animal
as an atonement for having taken her life. Before they
feasted on the bear's flesh, an orator made a speech in which
he deplored the sad necessity under which they laboured of
destroying their friends the bears; for how otherwise could
they subsist?<note place='foot'>Henry's <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, pp. 143-145,
quoted by J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1900), pp. 446
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Some of the Indians of the Queen Charlotte
Islands, off the north-western coast of America, used
to mark the skins of bears, otters, and other animals with
four red crosses in a line, by way of propitiating the spirit
of the beast they had killed.<note place='foot'>A. Mackenzie, <q>Descriptive notes
on certain implements, weapons, etc.,
from Graham Island, Queen Charlotte
Islands, B.C.,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Royal Society of Canada</hi>, ix. (1891)
section ii. p. 58.</note> When the Thompson Indians
of British Columbia were about to hunt bears, they would
sometimes address the animal and ask it to come and be
shot. They prayed the grisly bear not to be angry with the
hunter, nor to fight him, but rather to have pity on him and
to deliver himself up to his mercies. The man who intended
to hunt the grisly bear had to be chaste for some time before
he set out on his dangerous adventure. When he had killed
a bear, he and his companions painted their faces in alternate
perpendicular stripes of black and red, and sang the bear
song. Sometimes the hunter also prayed, thanking the beast
for letting itself be killed so easily, and begging that its
mate might share the same fate. After they had eaten the
flesh of the bear's head, they tied the skull to the top of a
small tree, as high as they could reach, and left it there.
Having done so, they painted their faces with alternate stripes
of red and black as before; for if they failed to observe this
ceremony, the bears would be offended, and the hunters
would not be able to kill any more. To place the heads of
bears or any large beasts on trees or stones was a mark of
respect to the animals.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia</hi>, p. 347 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History</hi>,
April 1900). The Thompson Indians
used to be known as the Couteau or
Knife Indians.</note> The Lillooet and Shuswap Indians
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
of the same region used to observe similar ceremonies at the
killing of a bear.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Lillooet Indians</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1906), p. 279
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
Memoir of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Shuswap</hi>
(Leyden and New York, 1909), pp.
602 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of slain
elephants
in Africa.</note>
A like respect is testified for other dangerous creatures
by the hunters who regularly trap and kill them. When
Caffre hunters are in the act of showering spears on an
elephant, they call out, <q>Don't kill us, great captain; don't
strike or tread upon us, mighty chief.</q><note place='foot'>Stephen Kay, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches
in Caffraria</hi> (London, 1833),
p. 138.</note> When he is dead
they make their excuses to him, pretending that his death
was a pure accident. As a mark of respect they bury his
trunk with much solemn ceremony; for they say that
<q>the elephant is a great lord; his trunk is his hand.</q><note place='foot'>L. Alberti, <hi rend='italic'>De Kaffers aan de
Zuidkust van Afrika</hi> (Amsterdam,
1810), p. 95. Alberti's information
is repeated by H. Lichtenstein (<hi rend='italic'>Reisen
im südlichen Afrika</hi>, Berlin, 1811-1812,
i. 412) and by Cowper Rose
(<hi rend='italic'>Four Years in Southern Africa</hi>, London,
1829, p. 155). The burial of the
trunk is also mentioned by Kay, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
Before the Amaxosa Caffres attack an elephant they shout
to the animal and beg him to pardon them for the slaughter
they are about to perpetrate, professing great submission to
his person and explaining clearly the need they have of his
tusks to enable them to procure beads and supply their
wants. When they have killed him they bury in the ground,
along with the end of his trunk, a few of the articles they
have obtained for the ivory, thus hoping to avert some
mishap that would otherwise befall them.<note place='foot'>J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal</hi>
(London, 1857), p. 215.</note> Among the
Wanyamwezi of Central Africa, when hunters have killed
an elephant, they bury his legs on the spot where he fell
and then cover the place with stones. The burial is supposed
to appease the spirit of the dead elephant and to
ensure the success of the hunters in future undertakings.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894),
p. 87.</note>
When the Baganda have killed an elephant, they extract
the nerve from the tusk and bury it, taking care to mark
the place of the burial. For they think that the ghost of
the dead elephant attaches itself to the nerve, and that if a
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
hunter were to step over the nerve, the elephant's ghost
would cause him to be killed by an elephant the next time
he went forth to hunt the beasts.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 447.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of lions
in Africa.</note>
In Latuka, a district of the Upper Nile, lions are much
respected, and are only killed when they prove very troublesome
and dangerous. There used to be in this region a
Lion-chief, as he was called, who professed to have all lions
under his control, and who actually kept several tame lions
about his house. Whenever a lion was accidentally caught
in a trap near the station of the Egyptian Government, this
man would regularly present himself and demand the release
of the noble animal. The favour was always granted, and
planks were let down into the pit to enable the imprisoned
lion to clamber up and escape.<note place='foot'>Fr. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p.
785.</note> Amongst some tribes of
Eastern Africa, when a lion is killed, the carcase is brought
before the king, who does homage to it by prostrating himself
on the ground and rubbing his face on the muzzle of the beast.<note place='foot'>J. Becker, <hi rend='italic'>La Vie en Afrique</hi> (Paris
and Brussels, 1887), ii. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 305.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of slain
leopards in
Africa.</note>
In some parts of Western Africa if a negro kills a
leopard he is bound fast and brought before the chiefs for
having killed one of their peers. The man defends himself
on the plea that the leopard is chief of the forest and therefore
a stranger. He is then set at liberty and rewarded.
But the dead leopard, adorned with a chief's bonnet, is set
up in the village, where nightly dances are held in its
honour.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi> (Jena,
1874-1875), ii. 243.</note> The leopard is held in great veneration by the
Igaras of the Niger. They call it <q>father</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>atta</foreign>), though
they do not object to kill the animal in the chase. When a
dead leopard is brought into Idah, the capital, it is dressed
up in white and borne on the heads of four men from house
to house, amidst singing and beating of drums. Each householder
gives a present of cowries or cloth to the owner of
the leopard, and at last the carcase is buried with great ceremony
and firing of guns. Should these rites be neglected,
the people imagine that the spirit of the dead leopard will
punish them.<note place='foot'>A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, <hi rend='italic'>Up the
Niger</hi> (London, 1892), p. 309.</note> Among the Ewe negroes of Togoland
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
<q>hunters who had killed buffaloes, leopards, or wild black
swine observed in Agome for nine days the same, or very
similar, ceremonies as are customary at the death of a
woman, in order to prevent the soul of the slain beasts
from avenging itself on them, a custom which is the less
surprising because the mourning customs themselves are
based on the fear of spirits, namely the spirits of the dead.
The natives ascribe to the souls of these dangerous animals
the power of killing the man who shot them, or of so blinding
and enchanting him that in the chase he confuses animals
and men and so incurs serious mishaps.</q><note place='foot'>Lieut. Herold, <q>Bericht betreffend
religiöse Anschauungen und Gebräuche
der deutschen Ewe-Neger,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
von Forschungsreisenden und
Gelehrten aus den deutschen Schutzgebieten</hi>,
v. Heft 4 (Berlin, 1892), p.
156.</note> The quaint ceremonies
which these negroes observe for the purpose of
avoiding the imaginary perils have been described by a
German missionary. The leopard and the wild buffalo,
he tells us, are believed to be animated by malignant
souls which not only do the hunter a mischief while
they still occupy the bodies of the living creatures, but
even after death, in their disembodied state, continue to
haunt and plague their slayer, sometimes egging on a
serpent or a leopard to sting or bite him, sometimes blinding
him so that he shoots a man for an animal, or cannot
find his way home and goes groping about in the wilderness
till he perishes miserably. If a man thus blinded
and crazed should make his way back to the town, he is
banished for life and sold into slavery; his house and plantation
are razed to the ground; and his nearest relations
are often given as bail into the hands of strangers. It
is therefore a very serious matter indeed for a hunter to
incur the wrath of a leopard's ghost, and it is quite natural
that he should take all reasonable measures to guard himself
against so threatening a calamity. Hence as soon as
he has killed a leopard, he hurries back to the town and
brings word of it to the other men who have slain leopards
on former occasions, and who now assist him with their
advice and experience. The first thing they do is to put a
stalk of grass in his mouth as a sign that he may not speak.
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
Then they repair to the place where the leopard lies dead in
the forest, and inform the animal of the reasons why he has
been shot, namely, because he has stolen sheep, fowls, and
pigs, and has killed men. Next the drums are beaten and
the people assemble in the open square of the town. The
dead leopard meanwhile has been fastened to a pole, and
with his eyes bandaged and his face upturned to heaven, is
solemnly carried about the town and set down before the
houses of the principal folk, who reward the hero and his
comrades with presents. After the procession has gone the
round, the leopard is tied to a tree, and the hunters paint the
slayer with red and white so as to make him look like a
leopard, except that the leopard's spots are only painted on
the left side of his body; a basket painted in the same
colours is clapped on his head, and magical strings of
cowries are tied round his hands and feet. Thus attired,
he and the other heroes who have killed leopards crawl
about on all fours and roar like leopards when anybody
comes near them. In his left hand every man grasps a bow
for the slaughter of innocent cocks and hens, and with his
right he grabbles about in the earth like an animal seeking
what it may devour. None of them may speak, they may
only roar, but they do that in a masterly manner. At the
head of this imposing procession go two men armed with
a thick cudgel and a spear respectively; and the rear is
brought up by a third man, who is privileged to walk
upright on his hind legs. This favoured person is the cook,
whose office it is to dress the fowls which the human leopards;
purloin in the course of their pilgrimage; indeed for nineteen
days they are privileged, no doubt in their character of
leopards, to rob the hen-roosts with impunity. In the afternoon
the carcase of the leopard is taken down, skinned, and
cut up. The titbits are sent to the chief and the other
dignitaries, who eat them; and the remainder of the flesh is
consumed by the common folk. The skin, the teeth, the
head, and the claws belong to the hunter who killed the
beast. But for nineteen days thereafter the slayer of the
leopard must retain his peculiar costume: he may eat only
warm-blooded animals and food seasoned with salt: he may
not eat anything seasoned with pepper; and on no account
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
may he taste fish, because they are cold-blooded creatures.
A general feast, of which all the male inhabitants of the
town partake, winds up the proceedings at the close of the
nineteen days. A feature of the festivities is a dramatic
representation of a leopard-hunt, which is carried out in
every detail amid great excitement. If only all these ceremonies
are strictly observed, the hunter need have no fear
at all of being plagued by the leopard's ghost.<note place='foot'>H. Spieth, <q>Jagdgebräuche in
Avatime,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der geographischen
Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>, ix. (1890)
pp. 18-20. Compare H. Klose, <hi rend='italic'>Togo
unter deutscher Flagge</hi> (Berlin, 1899),
pp. 145-147. The ceremonies observed
after the slaughter of a wild buffalo are
of the same general character with variations
in detail.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of slain
buffaloes
and sheep
in Uganda.</note>
The Baganda greatly fear the ghosts of buffaloes which
they have killed, and they always appease these dangerous
spirits. On no account will they bring the head of a slain
buffalo into a village or into a garden of plantains: they
always eat the flesh of the head in the open country. Afterwards
they place the skull in a small hut built for the purpose,
where they pour out beer as an offering and pray to the
ghost to stay where he is and not to harm them.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes
on the Manners and Customs of the
Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p. 54;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi> (London, 1911), pp.
289, 448.</note> Oddly
enough the Baganda also dread the ghosts of sheep, which
they believe would haunt and kill the butcher if they saw
him give the fatal stroke. Hence when a man is about
to slaughter a sheep, he gets another man to divert its attention,
and coming up behind the unsuspecting animal he stuns
it with the blow of an axe-handle; then, before it can recover
consciousness, he adroitly cuts its throat. In this way the
ghost of the sheep is bamboozled and will not haunt the
butcher. Moreover, when a sheep dies in a house, the housewife
may not say bluntly to her husband, <q>The sheep is
dead,</q> or its ghost, touched to the quick, would certainly
make her fall ill and might even kill her. She must put
a finer point on the painful truth by saying, <q>I am unable
to untie such and such a sheep.</q> Her husband understands
her, but the ghost of the animal does not, or at all events he
does not resent so delicate an allusion to its melancholy
decease.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Another
curious notion which the Baganda have
about sheep is that they give health to
cattle and prevent them from being
struck by lightning. Hence a sheep
is often herded with cows to serve as
a sort of lightning-conductor. See
J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 421.</note> Even the ghost of a fowl may haunt a Muganda
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
woman and make her ill, if she has accidentally killed it with
her hoe and flung away the body in the long grass instead of
carrying it to her husband and confessing her fault.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 423
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Further, <q>if a man's dog died in
the house, his wife dared not touch it,
because she feared its ghost; she would
call her husband to take it away</q> (op.
cit. p. 425).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of dead
whales
among the
Koryak.</note>
Another formidable beast whose life the savage hunter
takes with joy, yet with fear and trembling, is the whale.
After the slaughter of a whale the maritime Koryak of
north-eastern Siberia hold a communal festival, the essential
part of which <q>is based on the conception that the whale
killed has come on a visit to the village; that it is staying
for some time, during which it is treated with great respect;
that it then returns to the sea to repeat its visit the following
year; that it will induce its relatives to come along, telling
them of the hospitable reception that has been accorded to it.
According to the Koryak ideas, the whales, like all other
animals, constitute one tribe, or rather family, of related
individuals, who live in villages like the Koryak. They
avenge the murder of one of their number, and are grateful
for kindnesses that they may have received.</q><note place='foot'>W. Jochelson, <hi rend='italic'>The Koryak</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1908), p. 66 (<hi rend='italic'>The
Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>, vol. vi.,
<hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>).</note> As large
whales are now rarely seen in the bays of the Okhotsk Sea,
the Koryak at the present time generally celebrate the
festival for a white whale. One such festival was witnessed
by Mr. W. Jochelson, at the village of Kuel, in October 1900.
A white whale had been caught in the nets, and as the sea
was partially frozen, the carcase had to be brought ashore in
a sledge. When it was seen nearing the beach, a number of
women, arrayed in their long embroidered dancing-coats,
went forth to meet and welcome it, carrying lighted fire-brands
in their hands. To carry burning fire-brands from
the hearth is the ancient Koryak fashion of greeting an
honoured guest. Strictly speaking, the women who go forth
to welcome a whale to the house should wear masks of sedge-grass
on their faces as well as dancing-coats on their bodies,
and should carry sacrificial alder branches as well as firebrands
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
in their hands, but on the present occasion the women
dispensed with the use of masks. They danced, shaking
their heads, moving their shoulders, and swinging their whole
bodies with arms outstretched, now squatting, now rising and
singing, <q>Ah! a guest has come.</q> In spite of the cold and the
wind the sweat dripped from them, so violently did they dance,
and they sang and screamed till they were hoarse. When the
sledge with its burden had reached the shore, one of the women
pronounced an incantation over the whale's head, and then
thrust alder branches and sacrificial grass into its mouth.
Next they muffled its head in a hood, apparently to prevent
the creature from witnessing the painful spectacle of its own
dissection. After that the men cut up the carcase, and the
women collected the blood in pails. Two seals, which
had also been killed, were included in the festivities which
followed. The heads of all three animals were cut off and
placed on the roof of the house. Next day the festival
began. In the morning the women plaited travelling bags
of grass for the use of the whale, and made grass masks.
In the evening, the people having assembled in a large
underground house, some boiled pieces of the white whale
were placed in a grass bag and set before a wooden image
of a white whale, so that the animal, or its departed spirit,
was thus apparently supposed to be regaled with portions of
its own body; for the white whale and the seals were treated
as honoured guests at the banquet. To keep up the pretence,
the people were silent or spoke only in whispers for fear of
wakening the guests before the time. At last the preparations
were complete: fresh faggots piled on the hearth sent
up a blaze, illumining with an unsteady light the smoke-blackened
walls of the vast underground dwelling, which a
moment before had been shrouded in darkness; and the
long silence was broken by the joyful cries of the women,
<q>Here dear guests have come!</q> <q>Visit us often!</q> <q>When
you go back to the sea, tell your friends to call on us also,
we will prepare just as nice food for them as for you.</q> With
these words they pointed to puddings set out temptingly on
the boards. Next the host took a piece of the fat of the white
whale and threw it into the fire, saying, <q>We are burning it
in the fire for thee!</q> Then he went to the domestic shrine,
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
placed lumps of fat before the rude effigies of the guardian
spirits, and smeared fat on their mouths. The appetites of the
higher powers having thus been satisfied, the people set to
and partook of the good things provided for them, including
the flesh of the white whale and the seals. Lastly, two old
men practised divination by means of the shoulder-blade of
a seal to discover whether the white whale would go back to
the sea and call his fellows to come and be caught like himself.
In order to extract this information from the bone
burning coals were piled on it, and the resulting cracks were
carefully scrutinised. To the delight of all present the omens
proved favourable: a long transverse crack indicated the sea
to which the spirit of the white whale would soon depart.
Four days later the departure actually took place. It was
a bright sunshiny wintry morning: the frost was keen;
and for more than a mile seaward the beach was covered
with blocks of ice. In the great underground dwelling,
where the feast had been held, the hearth had been turned
into something like an altar. On it lay the heads of
the white whale and the seals, and beside them travelling-bags
of grass filled with puddings, which the souls of the
animals were to take with them on their long journey.
Beside the hearth knelt two women, their faces covered with
grass masks and their heads bent over the bags, mumbling
an incantation. The sunlight streamed down on them
through the smoke-hole overhead, but spread only a dim
twilight through the remoter recesses of the vast subterranean
chamber. The masks worn by the women were intended to
guard them against the spirit of the white whale, which was
supposed to be hovering invisible in the air. The incantation
over, the women rose from their knees and doffed their
masks. A careful examination of a pudding, which had
been offered in sacrifice to the white whale, now revealed
the joyful intelligence that the spirit of the whale had
accepted the sacrifice and was about to return to the sea.
All that remained, therefore, to do was to speed him on his
way. For that purpose two men ascended the roof, let down
thongs through the smoke-hole, and hauled up the heads of
the white whale and of the seals together with the travelling-bags
of provisions. That concluded the despatch of the
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
souls of the dead animals to their home in the great
waters.<note place='foot'>W. Jochelson, <hi rend='italic'>The Koryak</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1908), pp. 66-76
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</hi>,
vol. vi., <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of
whales,
hippopotamuses,
ounces,
and apes.</note>
When the inhabitants of the Isle of St. Mary, to the
north of Madagascar, go a-whaling, they single out the young
whales for attack and <q>humbly beg the mother's pardon,
stating the necessity that drives them to kill her progeny,
and requesting that she will be pleased to go below while
the deed is doing, that her maternal feelings may not be
outraged by witnessing what must cause her so much uneasiness.</q><note place='foot'>Captain W. F. W. Owen, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative
of Voyages to explore the Shores of
Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar</hi> (London,
1833), i. 170.</note>
An Ajumba hunter having killed a female
hippopotamus on Lake Azyingo in West Africa, the animal
was decapitated and its quarters and bowels removed. Then
the hunter, naked, stepped into the hollow of the ribs, and
kneeling down in the bloody pool washed his whole body
with the blood and excretions of the animal, while he
prayed to the soul of the hippopotamus not to bear him a
grudge for having killed her and so blighted her hopes of
future maternity; and he further entreated the ghost not to
stir up other hippopotamuses to avenge her death by butting
at and capsizing his canoe.<note place='foot'>Rev. R. H. Nassau, <hi rend='italic'>Fetichism in
West Africa</hi> (London, 1904), p. 204.</note> The ounce, a leopard-like
creature, is dreaded for its depredations by the Indians of
Brazil. When they have caught one of these animals in a
snare, they kill it and carry the body home to the village.
There the women deck the carcase with feathers of many
colours, put bracelets on its legs, and weep over it, saying,
<q>I pray thee not to take vengeance on our little ones for
having been caught and killed through thine own ignorance.
For it was not we who deceived thee, it was thyself. Our
husbands only set the trap to catch animals that are good to
eat: they never thought to take thee in it. Therefore, let
not thy soul counsel thy fellows to avenge thy death on our
little ones!</q><note place='foot'>A. Thevet, <hi rend='italic'>La Cosmographie Universelle</hi>
(Paris, 1575), ii. 936 [970]
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the Yuracares Indians of Bolivia have
killed great apes in their tropical forests, they bring the bodies
home, set them out in a row on palm leaves with their heads
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
all looking one way, sprinkle them with chicha, and say,
<q>We love you, since we have brought you home.</q> They
imagine that the performance of this ceremony is very gratifying
to the other apes in the woods.<note place='foot'>A. d'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Amérique
Méridionale</hi>, iii. (Paris and Strasburg,
1844) p. 202.</note> Before they leave a
temporary camp in the forest, where they have killed a
tapir and dried the meat on a babracot, the Indians of
Guiana invariably destroy this babracot, saying that should
a tapir passing that way find traces of the slaughter of one
of his kind, he would come by night on the next occasion
when Indians slept at that place, and, taking a man, would
babracot him in revenge.<note place='foot'>E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Indians
of Guiana</hi> (London, 1883), p. 352.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of dead
eagles.
Deceiving
the ghosts
of spiders.</note>
When a Blackfoot Indian has caught eagles in a trap
and killed them, he takes them home to a special lodge,
called the eagles' lodge, which has been prepared for their
reception outside of the camp. Here he sets the birds in
a row on the ground, and propping up their heads on a
stick, puts a piece of dried meat in each of their mouths
in order that the spirits of the dead eagles may go and tell
the other eagles how well they are being treated by the
Indians.<note place='foot'>G. B. Grinnell, <hi rend='italic'>Blackfoot Lodge
Tales</hi> (London, 1893), p. 240.</note> So when Indian hunters of the Orinoco region
have killed an animal, they open its mouth and pour into
it a few drops of the liquor they generally carry with them,
in order that the soul of the dead beast may inform its
fellows of the welcome it has met with, and that they too,
cheered by the prospect of the same kind reception, may
come with alacrity to be killed.<note place='foot'>A. Caulin, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Coro-graphica
natural y evangelica dela Nueva Andalucia
Guayana y Vertientes del Rio
Orinoco</hi> (1779), p. 97.</note> A Cherokee hunter who
has killed an eagle stands over the dead bird and prays it
not to avenge itself on his tribe, because it is not he but a
Spaniard who has done the cruel deed.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the Cherokee,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>, Part i.
(Washington, 1900) p. 282.</note> When a Teton
Indian is on a journey and he meets a grey spider or a
spider with yellow legs, he kills it, because some evil would
befall him if he did not. But he is very careful not to let
the spider know that he kills it, for if the spider knew, his
soul would go and tell the other spiders, and one of them
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
would be sure to avenge the death of his relation. So in
crushing the insect, the Indian says, <q>O Grandfather Spider,
the Thunder-beings kill you.</q> And the spider is crushed at
once and believes what is told him. His soul probably runs
and tells the other spiders that the Thunder-beings have
killed him; but no harm comes of that. For what can grey
or yellow-legged spiders do to the Thunder-beings?<note place='foot'>J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Teton Folklore
Notes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of American Folklore</hi>,
ii. (1889) p. 134; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>A Study
of Siouan Cults,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1894), p. 479.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ceremonies
of
propitiation
offered
to slain
animals
vary with
the more
or less
dangerous
character
of the
creature.
Animals
which,
without
being
feared, are
valued for
their flesh
or their
skin, are
also treated
with
respect.</note>
But it is not merely dangerous creatures with whom the
savage desires to keep on good terms. It is true that the
respect which he pays to wild beasts is in some measure
proportioned to their strength and ferocity. Thus the
savage Stiens of Cambodia, believing that all animals have
souls which roam about after their death, beg an animal's
pardon when they kill it, lest its soul should come and
torment them. Also they offer it sacrifices, but these
sacrifices are proportioned to the size and strength of the
animal. The ceremonies observed at the death of an
elephant are conducted with much pomp and last seven
days.<note place='foot'>H. Mouhot, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Central
Parts of Indo-China</hi> (London, 1864),
i. 252; J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du
Cambodge</hi> (Paris, 1883), i. 422.</note> Similar distinctions are drawn by North American
Indians. <q>The bear, the buffalo, and the beaver are
manidos [divinities] which furnish food. The bear is formidable,
and good to eat. They render ceremonies to him,
begging him to allow himself to be eaten, although they
know he has no fancy for it. We kill you, but you are not
annihilated. His head and paws are objects of homage....
Other animals are treated similarly from similar reasons....
Many of the animal manidos, not being dangerous,
are often treated with contempt&mdash;the terrapin, the weasel,
polecat, etc.</q><note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi> (Philadelphia,
1853-1856), v. 420.</note> The distinction is instructive. Animals
which are feared, or are good to eat, or both, are treated
with ceremonious respect; those which are neither formidable
nor good to eat are despised. We have had examples
of reverence paid to animals which are both feared and
eaten. It remains to prove that similar respect is shewn
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
to animals which, without being feared, are either eaten or
valued for their skins.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Respect
shewn to
dead
sables.
Bones of
sables and
beavers
kept out of
reach of
dogs, lest
the spirits
of the dead
animals
should be
offended.</note>
When Siberian sable-hunters have caught a sable, no
one is allowed to see it, and they think that if good or evil
be spoken of the captured sable no more sables will be
caught. A hunter has been known to express his belief
that the sables could hear what was said of them as far off
as Moscow. He said that the chief reason why the sable
hunt was now so unproductive was that some live sables had
been sent to Moscow. There they had been viewed with
astonishment as strange animals, and the sables cannot abide
that. Another, though minor, cause of the diminished take
of sables was, he alleged, that the world is now much worse
than it used to be, so that nowadays a hunter will sometimes
hide the sable which he has got instead of putting it into
the common stock. This also, said he, the sables cannot
abide.<note place='foot'>J. G. Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>
(Göttingen, 1751-1752), ii. 278.</note> A Russian traveller happening once to enter a
Gilyak hut in the absence of the owner, observed a freshly
killed sable hanging on the wall. Seeing him look at it, the
housewife in consternation hastened to muffle the animal in
a fur cap, after which it was taken down, wrapt in birch
bark, and put away out of sight. Despite the high price he
offered for it, the traveller's efforts to buy the animal were
unavailing. It was bad enough, they told him, that he, a
stranger, had seen the dead sable in its skin, but far worse
consequences for the future catch of sables would follow if
they were to sell him the animal entire.<note place='foot'>L. von Schrenck, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen und
Forschungen im Amur-lande</hi>, iii. 564.</note> Alaskan hunters
preserve the bones of sables and beavers out of reach of the
dogs for a year and then bury them carefully, <q>lest the spirits
who look after the beavers and sables should consider that
they are regarded with contempt, and hence no more should
be killed or trapped.</q><note place='foot'>W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 89; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>The
Yukon Territory</hi> (London, 1898),
p. 89.</note> The Shuswap Indians of British
Columbia think that if they did not throw beaver-bones into
the river, the beavers would not go into the traps any more,
and that the same thing would happen were a dog to eat
the flesh or gnaw the bone of a beaver.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p.
92 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1890</hi>).</note> Carrier Indians
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
who have trapped martens or beavers take care to keep
them from the dogs; for if a dog were to touch these
animals the Indians believe that the other martens or
beavers would not suffer themselves to be caught.<note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <q>Notes, archæological,
industrial, and sociological, on
the Western Dénés,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of
the Canadian Institute</hi>, iv. (1892-93)
p. 108.</note> A
missionary who fell in with an old Carrier Indian asked
him what luck he had in the chase. <q>Oh, don't speak to me
about it,</q> replied the Indian; <q>there are beavers in plenty.
I caught one myself immediately after my arrival here, but
unluckily a dog got hold of it. You know that after that
it has been impossible for me to catch another.</q> <q>Nonsense,</q>
said the missionary; <q>set your traps as if nothing
had happened, and you will see.</q> <q>That would be useless,</q>
answered the Indian in a tone of despair, <q>quite useless.
You don't know the ways of the beaver. If a dog merely
touches a beaver, all the other beavers are angry at the
owner of the dog and always keep away from his traps.</q>
It was in vain that the missionary tried to laugh or argue
him out of his persuasion; the man persisted in abandoning
his snares and giving up the hunt, because, as he asserted,
the beavers were angry with him.<note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <hi rend='italic'>Au pays de l'Ours
Noir, chez les sauvages de la Colombie
Britannique</hi> (Paris and Lyons, 1897),
p. 71.</note> A French traveller,
observing that the Indians of Louisiana did not give the
bones of beavers and otters to their dogs, enquired the
reason. They told him there was a spirit in the woods who
would tell the other beavers and otters, and that after that
they would catch no more animals of these species.<note place='foot'>L. Hennepin, <hi rend='italic'>Description de la
Louisiane</hi> (Paris, 1683), pp. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
Canadian Indians were equally particular not to let their
dogs gnaw the bones, or at least certain of the bones, of
beavers. They took the greatest pains to collect and
preserve these bones, and, when the beaver had been caught
in a net, they threw them into the river. To a Jesuit who
argued that the beavers could not possibly know what
became of their bones, the Indians replied, <q>You know
nothing about catching beavers and yet you will be prating
about it. Before the beaver is stone dead, his soul
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
takes a turn in the hut of the man who is killing him and
makes a careful note of what is done with his bones. If
the bones are given to the dogs, the other beavers would
get word of it and would not let themselves be caught.
Whereas, if their bones are thrown into the fire or a
river, they are quite satisfied; and it is particularly gratifying
to the net which caught them.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p. 24
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).
Nets are regarded by the Indians as
living creatures who not only think and
feel but also eat, speak, and marry
wives. See F. Gabriel Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons</hi>, p.
256 (pp. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> of the reprint, Librairie
Tross, Paris, 1865); S. Hearne,
<hi rend='italic'>Journey to the Northern Ocean</hi> (London,
1795), pp. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Relations des
Jésuites</hi>, 1636, p. 109; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 1639, p.
95; Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi> (Paris, 1744), v. 225; Chateaubriand,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>, pp. 140
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The Hebrews sacrificed and
burned incense to their nets (Habakkuk
i. 16). In some of the mountain villages
of Annam the people, who are great
hunters, sacrifice fowls, rice, incense,
and gilt paper to their nets at the
festival of the New Year. See Le R. P.
Cadière, <q>Coutumes populaires de la
vallée du Nguôn-So'n,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
l'École Française d'Extrême-Orient</hi>,
ii. (Hanoi, 1902) p. 381. When a
net has caught little or nothing, the
Ewe negroes think that it must be
hungry; so they call in the help of a
priest, who commonly feeds the hungry
net by sprinkling maize-flour and fish,
moistened with palm oil, on its meshes.
See G. Härtter, <q>Der Fischfang im
Evheland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xxxviii. (1906) p. 55.</note> Before hunting
the beaver they offered a solemn prayer to the Great
Beaver, and presented him with tobacco; and when the
chase was over, an orator pronounced a funeral oration
over the dead beavers. He praised their spirit and
wisdom. <q>You will hear no more,</q> said he, <q>the voice
of the chieftains who commanded you and whom you
chose from among all the warrior beavers to give you
laws. Your language, which the medicine-men understand
perfectly, will be heard no more at the bottom of
the lake. You will fight no more battles with the otters,
your cruel foes. No, beavers! But your skins shall serve
to buy arms; we will carry your smoked hams to our
children; we will keep the dogs from eating your bones,
which are so hard.</q><note place='foot'>Chateaubriand, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>,
pp. 175, 178 (Paris, Michel
Lévy Frères, 1870). They will not let
the blood of beavers fall on the ground,
or their luck in hunting them would be
gone (<hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1633, p.
21). Compare the rule about not
allowing the blood of kings to fall on
the ground. See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils
of the Soul</hi>, pp. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Deer, elk,
and elan
treated by
the American
Indians
with ceremonious
respect.</note>
The elan, deer, and elk were treated by the American
Indians with the same punctilious respect, and for the same
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
reason. Their bones might not be given to the dogs nor
thrown into the fire, nor might their fat be dropped upon
the fire, because the souls of the dead animals were believed
to see what was done to their bodies and to tell it to the
other beasts, living and dead. Hence, if their bodies were
ill-used, the animals of that species would not allow themselves
to be taken, neither in this world nor in the world to
come.<note place='foot'>L. Hennepin, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveau voyage d'un
pais plus grand que l'Europe</hi> (Utrecht,
1698), pp. 141. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>,
1636, p. 109; F. Gabriel Sagard, Le
<hi rend='italic'>Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons</hi>, p.
255 (p. 178 of the reprint, Libraire
Tross, Paris, 1865). Not quite consistently
the Canadian Indians used to
kill every elan they could overtake in
the chase, lest any should escape to
warn their fellows (Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>).</note> The houses of the Indians of Honduras were
encumbered with the bones of deer, the Indians believing
that if they threw the bones away, the other deer could not
be taken.<note place='foot'>A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History of
the vast Continent and Islands of
America</hi>, translated by Capt. John
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv. 142.</note> Among the Chiquites of Paraguay a sick man
would be asked by the medicine-man whether he had not
thrown away some of the flesh of the deer or turtle, and if
he answered yes, the medicine-man would say, <q>That is
what is killing you. The soul of the deer or turtle has
entered into your body to avenge the wrong you did it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>, Nouvelle
Édition, viii. (Paris, 1781) p. 339.</note>
Before the Tzentales of Southern Mexico and the Kekchis
of Guatemala venture to skin a deer which they have killed,
they lift up its head and burn copal before it as an offering;
otherwise a certain being named Tzultacca would be angry
and send them no more game.<note place='foot'>C. Sapper, <q>Die Gebräuche und
religiösen Anschauungen der Kekchí-Indianer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Internationales Archiv für
Ethnographie</hi>, viii. (1895) pp. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Cherokee hunters ask
pardon of the deer they kill. If they failed to do so, they
think that the Little Deer, the chief of the deer tribe, who
can never die or be wounded, would track the hunter to his
home by the blood-drops on the ground and would put the
spirit of rheumatism into him. Sometimes the hunter, on
starting for home, lights a fire in the trail behind him to
prevent the Little Deer from pursuing him.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Cherokee Theory
and Practice of Medicine,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American
Journal of Folk-lore</hi>, iii. (1890) pp.
45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Sacred Formulas of the
Cherokees,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1891), pp. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 347; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Myths
of the Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington, 1900)
pp. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Before they
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
went out to hunt for deer, antelope, or elk the Apaches used
to resort to sacred caves, where the medicine-men propitiated
with prayer and sacrifice the animal gods whose progeny
they intended to destroy.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <q>Religion of the
Apache Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, ii. (1891)
p. 438.</note> The Indians of Louisiana bewailed
bitterly the death of the buffaloes which they were
about to kill. More than two hundred of them at a time
have been seen shedding crocodile tears over the approaching
slaughter of the animals, while they marched in solemn
procession, headed by an old man who waved a pocket-handkerchief
at the end of a stick as an oriflamme, and by a
woman who strutted proudly along, bearing on her back
a large kettle which had been recently abstracted from
the baggage of some French explorers.<note place='foot'>L. Hennepin, <hi rend='italic'>Description de
la Louisiane</hi> (Paris, 1683), pp. 80
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Thompson
Indians of British Columbia cherished many superstitious
beliefs and observed many superstitious practices in regard
to deer. When a deer was killed, they said that the rest of
the deer would be well pleased if the hunters butchered the
animal nicely and cleanly. To waste venison displeased the
animals, who after that would not allow themselves to be
shot by the hunter. If a hunter was overburdened and had
to leave some of the venison behind, the other deer were
better pleased if he hung it up on a tree than if he let it
lie on the ground. The guts were gathered and put where
the blood had been spilt in butchering the beast, and the
whole was covered up with a few fir-boughs. In laying the
boughs on the blood and guts the man told the deer not to
grieve for the death of their friend and not to take it ill that
he had left some of the body behind, for he had done his
best to cover it. If he did not cover it, they thought the
deer would be sorry or angry and would spoil his luck in the
chase. When the head of a deer had to be left behind, they
commonly placed it on the branch of a tree, that it might
not be contaminated by dogs and women. For the same
reason they burned the bones of the slain deer, lest they
should be touched by women or gnawed by dogs. And
venison was never brought into a hut by the common door,
because that door was used by women; it was taken in
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
through a hole made in the back of the hut. No hunter
would give a deer's head to a man who was the first or
second of a family, for that would make the rest of the deer
very shy and hard to shoot. And in telling his friends of
his bag he would generally call a buck a doe, and a doe he
would call a fawn, and a fawn he would call a hare. This
he did that he might not seem to the deer to brag.<note place='foot'>James Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
of British Columbia</hi>, pp. 346 sq.
(<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition,
Memoir of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>, April 1900).</note> The
Lillooet Indians of British Columbia threw the bones of
animals, particularly those of the deer and the beaver, into
the water, in order that the dogs should not defile or eat
them and thereby offend the animals. When the hunter
committed the bones to the water he generally prayed to
the dead animal, saying, <q>See! I treat you respectfully.
Nothing shall defile you. Have pity on me, so I may kill
more of you! May I be successful in hunting and
trapping!</q><note place='foot'>James Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Lillooet Indians</hi>
(Leyden and New York, 1906), pp.
281 sq. (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition, Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History</hi>).</note> The Canadian Indians would not eat the
embryos of the elk, unless at the close of the hunting
season; otherwise the mother-elks would be shy and refuse
to be caught.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p.
26 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Porcupines,
turtles,
and mice
treated by
American
Indians
with ceremonious
respect.</note>
Indians of the Lower Fraser River regard the porcupine
as their elder brother. Hence when a hunter kills one of these
creatures he asks his elder brother's pardon and does not eat
of the flesh till the next day.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <q>Ninth Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1894</hi>, PP. 459 sq.</note> The Sioux will not stick an
awl or needle into a turtle, for they are sure that, if they were
to do so, the turtle would punish them at some future time.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi> (Philadelphia,
1853-1856), iii. 230.</note>
Some of the North American Indians believed that each sort
of animal had its patron or genius who watched over and
preserved it. An Indian girl having once picked up a dead
mouse, her father snatched the little creature from her and
tenderly caressed and fondled it. Being asked why he did
so, he said that it was to appease the genius of mice, in
order that he might not torment his daughter for eating the
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
mouse. With that he handed the mouse to the girl and she
ate it.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi> (Paris, 1744), v. 443.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dead foxes,
turtles,
deer, and
pigs treated
with ceremonious
respect.</note>
When the Koryak have killed a fox, they take the body
home and lay it down near the fire, saying, <q>Let the guest
warm himself. When he feels warm, we will free him from
his overcoat.</q> So when the frozen carcase is thawed, they
skin it and wrap long strips of grass round about it. Then
the animal's mouth is filled with fish-roe, and the mistress of
the house gashes the flesh and puts more roe or dried meat
into the gashes, making believe that the gashes are the fox's
pockets, which she thus fills with provisions. Then the
carcase is carried out of the house, and the people say, <q>Go
and tell your friends that it is good to visit yonder house.
<q>Instead of my old coat, they gave me a new one still warmer
and with longer hair. I have eaten my fill, and had my
pockets well stored. You, too, go and visit them.</q></q> The
natives think that if they neglected to observe this ceremonial
they would have no luck in hunting foxes.<note place='foot'>W. Bogaras, <hi rend='italic'>The Chuckchee</hi>
(Leyden and New York, 1904-1909),
p. 409 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition</hi>, vol. vii., <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of the
American Museum of Natural History</hi>).</note> When a Ewe
hunter of Togoland has killed an antelope of a particular
kind (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Antilope leucoryx</foreign>), he erects an enclosure of branches,
within which he places the lower jawbones of all the animals
he has shot. Then he pours palm-wine and sprinkles meal
on the bones, saying, <q>Ye lower jawbones of beasts, ye are
now come home. Here is food, here is drink. Therefore
lead your comrades (that is, the living beasts of the forest)
hither also.</q><note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi>
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 389 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Timor-laut islands of the Indian
Archipelago the skulls of all the turtles which a fisherman
has caught are hung up under his house. Before he goes
out to catch another, he addresses himself to the skull of
the last turtle that he killed, and having inserted betel
between its jaws, he prays the spirit of the dead animal
to entice its kinsfolk in the sea to come and be caught.<note place='foot'>J. A. Jacobsen, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in die
Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres</hi> (Berlin,
1896), p. 234.</note>
In the Poso district of central Celebes hunters keep the
jawbones of deer and wild pigs which they have killed and
hang them up in their houses near the fire. Then they say
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
to the jawbones, <q>Ye cry after your comrades, that your
grandfathers, or nephews, or children may not go away.</q>
Their notion is that the souls of the dead deer and pigs
tarry near their jawbones and attract the souls of living
deer and pigs, which are thus drawn into the toils of the
hunter.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xli.
(1897) pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus in all these cases the wily savage employs
dead animals as decoys to lure living animals to their
doom.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ghost of
ostrich
outwitted.</note>
The Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco love to hunt
the ostrich, but when they have killed one of these
birds and are bringing home the carcase to the village,
they take steps to outwit the resentful ghost of their
victim. They think that when the first natural shock of
death is passed, the ghost of the ostrich pulls himself
together and makes after his body. Acting on this sage
calculation, the Indians pluck feathers from the breast of
the bird and strew them at intervals along the track. At
every bunch of feathers the ghost stops to consider, <q>Is
this the whole of my body or only a part of it?</q> The
doubt gives him pause, and when at last he has made up
his mind fully at all the bunches, and has further wasted
valuable time by the zigzag course which he invariably
pursues in going from one to another, the hunters are safe
at home, and the bilked ghost may stalk in vain round
about the village, which he is too timid to enter.<note place='foot'>W. Barbrooke Grubb, <hi rend='italic'>An Unknown
People in an Unknown Land</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Esquimau
propitiation
of the
spirit who
controls
reindeer. Ceremonious
treatment
of sea-beasts
by
the Esquimaux.</note>
The Esquimaux of the Hudson Bay region believe that
the reindeer are controlled by a great spirit who resides in a
large cave near the end of Cape Chidley. The outward form
of the spirit is that of a huge white bear. He obtains and
controls the spirit of every reindeer that is slain or dies, and
it depends on his good will whether the people shall have a
supply of reindeer or not. The sorcerer intercedes with
this great spirit and prevails on him to send the deer to the
hungry Esquimaux. He informs the spirit that the people
have in no way offended him, since he, the sorcerer, has
taken great care that the whole of the meat was eaten up,
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
and that last spring, when the does were returning to him to
drop their young, none of the little or embryo fawns were
devoured by the dogs. After long incantations the magician
announces that the patron of the deer condescends to supply
the Esquimaux with the spirits of the animals in a material
form, and that soon there will be plenty in the land. He
charges the people to fall on and slay and thereby win the
approval of the spirit, who loves to see good folk enjoying
themselves, knowing that so long as the Esquimaux refrain
from feeding their dogs with the unborn young, the spirits of
the dead reindeer will return again to his watchful care. The
dogs are not allowed to taste the flesh, and until the supply
is plentiful they may not gnaw the leg-bones, lest the
guardian of the deer should take offence and send no more
of the animals. If, unfortunately, a dog should get at the
meat, a piece of his tail is cut off or his ear is cropped to
let the blood flow.<note place='foot'>L. M. Turner, <q>Ethnology of
the Ungava District, Hudson Bay
Territory,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1894), pp. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the Central Esquimaux hold that
sea-mammals, particularly whales, ground-seals, and common
seals, sprang from the severed fingers of the goddess Sedna,
and that therefore an Esquimau must make atonement for
every such animal that he kills. When a seal is brought
into the hut, the woman must stop working till it has been
cut up. After the capture of a ground seal, walrus, or
whale they must rest for three days. Not all sorts of
work, however, are forbidden, for they may mend articles
made of sealskin, but they may not make anything new.
For example, an old tent cover may be enlarged in order to
build a larger hut, but it is not allowed to make a new one.
Working on new deerskins is strictly forbidden. No skins
of this kind obtained in summer may be prepared before the
ice has formed and the first seal has been caught with the
harpoon. Later on, as soon as the first walrus has been
taken, the work must again stop until autumn comes round.
Hence all families are eager to finish the work on deerskins
as fast as possible, for until that is done the walrus season
may not begin.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Central Eskimo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1888), p.
595; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. (1901) pp. 119 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As
to the antagonism which these Esquimaux
suppose to exist between marine
and terrestrial animals, see above, p.
<ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>; and with regard to the taboos
observed by these Esquimaux after the
slaughter of sea-beasts, see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and
the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Greenlanders are careful not to
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
fracture the heads of seals or throw them into the sea, but
pile them in a heap before the door, that the souls of the
seals may not be enraged and scare their brethren from the
coast.<note place='foot'>D. Crantz, <hi rend='italic'>History of Greenland</hi>
(London, 1767), i. 216.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
ceremony
of returning
the
bladders
of the sea-beasts
to
the sea in
order that
the animals
may come
to life
again.</note>
The Esquimaux about Bering Strait believe that the
souls of dead sea-beasts, such as seals, walrus, and whales,
remain attached to their bladders, and that by returning the
bladders to the sea they can cause the souls to be reincarnated
in fresh bodies and so multiply the game which
the hunters pursue and kill. Acting on this belief every
hunter carefully removes and preserves the bladders of all
the sea-beasts that he kills; and at a solemn festival held
once a year in winter these bladders, containing the souls of
all the sea-beasts that have been killed throughout the
year, are honoured with dances and offerings of food in the
public assembly-room, after which they are taken out on the
ice and thrust through holes into the water; for the simple
Esquimaux imagine that the souls of the animals, in high
good humour at the kind treatment they have experienced,
will thereafter be born again as seals, walrus, and whales,
and in that form will flock willingly to be again speared,
harpooned, or otherwise done to death by the hunters.
The ceremonies observed at these annual festivals of reincarnation
are elaborate. The assembly-room or dancing-house
(<foreign rend='italic'>kashim</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>kassigim</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>kassigit</foreign>), in which the festival
is held, consists of a spacious semi-subterranean chamber
entered by a tunnel, which leads down to a large round
cellar under the floor of the house. From the cellar you
ascend into the assembly-room through a hole in the floor.
Wooden benches run round the apartment, which is lit by
lamps. An opening in the roof serves at once as a window
and a chimney. Unmarried men sleep in the assembly-room
at all times; they have no other home. The festival
is commonly held in December, but it may fall as late as
January. It lasts several days. When the time is come
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
to celebrate it, each hunter brings into the assembly-room
the inflated bladders of all the seals, walrus, and whales
that he has killed during the year. These are tied by the
necks in bunches and hung up on seal spears, which are
stuck in a row in the wall some six or eight feet above the
floor. Here food and water are offered to them, or rather
to the spirits of the animals which are supposed to be
present in the bladders; and the spirits signify their acceptance
of the offering by causing the bladders to swing
to and fro, a movement which is really produced by a
man sitting in a dark corner, who pulls a string attached
to the bladders. Further, the bladders are fumigated with
torches of wild parsnip stalks, the aromatic smoke and red
flames of which are believed to be well-pleasing to the souls
of the animals dangling in the bladders. Moreover to
amuse the souls men execute curious dances before them to
the music of drums. First the dancers move slowly with a
jerky action from side to side; then they gallop obliquely
with arms tossed up and down; and lastly they hop and
jump, always keeping perfect time to the beat of the drums.
The dance is supposed to imitate the movements of seals
and walrus; and again the spirits signify their pleasure by
making the bladders swing backwards and forwards. During
the continuance of the festival no loud noises may be made
in the assembly-room for fear of alarming the souls of the
animals in the bladders; if any person makes a noise by
accident, all the men present raise a chorus of cries in imitation
of the notes of the eider duck to let the souls of the
animals think that the unseemly disturbance proceeds from
the birds and not from the people. Further, so long as
the festival lasts, no wood may be cut with an iron axe in
the village, the men must keep rigidly apart from the
women, and no female above the age of puberty may come
near the bladders suspended in the assembly-room, the
reason assigned being that such women are unclean and
might offend the sensitive souls of the sea-beasts in the
bladders. But immature girls, being untainted by the
pollution which attaches to adult women, may go about the
bladders freely. The last and crowning scene of the
festival takes place at night or just at sunrise. The spears
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
with the bladders attached to them are passed out by the
shaman into the open air through the smoke-hole in the
roof. When all are outside, a huge torch of wild parsnip
stalks is lighted; the chief shaman takes it on his shoulder,
and runs with it as fast as he can across the snow and out
on the ice. Behind him troop all the men carrying each
his spear with the bladders of the sea-beasts dangling and
flapping from it; and in the rear race the women, children,
and old men, howling, screaming and making a great uproar.
In the darkness the lurid flame of the torch shoots high into
the air, casting a red glare over the snowy landscape and
lighting up the swarm of fantastic, fur-clad figures that
stream along in wild excitement. Arrived at a hole, which
had been cut on purpose in the sea-ice, the shaman plants
his burning torch beside it in the snow, and every man as
he comes up rips open his bladders and thrusts them, one
after the other, into the water under the ice. This ends
the ceremony. The souls of the dead seals, walrus, and
whales, are now ready to be born again in the depths of
the sea. So all the people return contented to the village.
At St. Michael the men who have thrust the bladders
under the ice are obliged on their return to leap through
a fire of wild parsnip stalks, probably as a mode of ceremonial
purification; for after the dance and the offering of
food at the festival the chief shaman passes a lighted torch
of parsnip stalks round the assembly-room and the dancers,
for the express purpose of purifying them and averting any
evil influence that might bring sickness or ill luck on the
hunters.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington,
1899), pp. 379-393, 437. Compare
A. Woldt, <hi rend='italic'>Captain Jacobsen's
Reise an der Nordwestküste Americas
1881-1883</hi> (Leipsic, 1884), pp. 289-291.
In the text the ceremony has
been described mainly as it was witnessed
by Mr. E. W. Nelson at
Kushunuk, near Cape Vancouver, in
December, 1879. As might have been
expected, the ritual varies in details
at different places.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Fish
treated
with respect
by
fishing
tribes. The
Peruvian
Indians
worshipped
the various
sorts of fish
which they
caught.
Fish
treated
with respect
by
the North
American
Indians. Herring respected
by
European
fishermen. Compensation
made
to fish for
catching
them.</note>
For like reasons, a tribe which depends for its subsistence,
chiefly or in part, upon fishing is careful to treat the
fish with every mark of honour and respect. The Indians
of Peru <q>worshipped the whale for its monstrous greatness.
Besides this ordinary system of worship, which prevailed
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
throughout the coast, the people of different provinces
adored the fish that they caught in greatest abundance;
for they said that the first fish that was made in the world
above (for so they named Heaven) gave birth to all other
fish of that species, and took care to send them plenty of
its children to sustain their tribe. For this reason they
worshipped sardines in one region, where they killed more
of them than of any other fish; in others, the skate; in
others, the dogfish; in others, the golden fish for its beauty;
in others, the crawfish; in others, for want of larger gods,
the crabs, where they had no other fish, or where they knew
not how to catch and kill them. In short, they had whatever
fish was most serviceable to them as their gods.</q><note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>Royal
Commentaries of the Yncas</hi>, translated
by C. R. Markham, First Part, bk. i.
ch. 10, vol. i. pp. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Hakluyt
Society, London, 1869-1871). Compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, vol. ii. p. 148.</note> The
Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia think that when a
salmon is killed its soul returns to the salmon country.
Hence they take care to throw the bones and offal into the
sea, in order that the soul may reanimate them at the
resurrection of the salmon. Whereas if they burned the
bones the soul would be lost, and so it would be quite
impossible for that salmon to rise from the dead.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp.
61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report
of the British Association for 1890</hi>);
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kwakiutl Texts</hi>, ii. pp. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
305 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 307, 317 (<hi rend='italic'>Jesup North Pacific
Expedition, Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History</hi>, December,
1902).</note> In like
manner the Otawa Indians of Canada, believing that the
souls of dead fish passed into other bodies of fish, never
burned fish bones, for fear of displeasing the souls of the
fish, who would come no more to the nets.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1667, p.
12 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</note> The Hurons
also refrained from throwing fish bones into the fire, lest
the souls of the fish should go and warn the other fish not
to let themselves be caught, since the Hurons would burn
their bones. Moreover, they had men who preached to the
fish and persuaded them to come and be caught. A good
preacher was much sought after, for they thought that the
exhortations of a clever man had a great effect in drawing
the fish to the nets. In the Huron fishing village where
the French missionary Sagard stayed, the preacher to the
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
fish prided himself very much on his eloquence, which was
of a florid order. Every evening after supper, having seen
that all the people were in their places and that a strict
silence was observed, he preached to the fish. His text
was that the Hurons did not burn fish bones. <q>Then
enlarging on this theme with extraordinary unction, he
exhorted and conjured and invited and implored the fish
to come and be caught and to be of good courage and to
fear nothing, for it was all to serve their friends who
honoured them and did not burn their bones.</q><note place='foot'>F. Gabriel Sagard, <hi rend='italic'>Le Grand
Voyage du Pays des Hurons</hi>, pp. 255
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (pp. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> of the reprint,
Libraire Tross, Paris, 1865).</note> At
Bogadjim in German New Guinea an enchanter is employed
to lure the fish to their doom. He stands in a canoe on
the beach with a decorated fish-basket beside him, and
commands the fish to come from all quarters to Bogadjim.<note place='foot'>B. Hagen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Papuas</hi>
(Wiesbaden, 1899), p. 270.</note>
When the Aino have killed a sword-fish, they thank the fish
for allowing himself to be caught and invite him to come
again.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), pp.
529 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Nootka Indians of British Columbia it
was formerly a rule that any person who had partaken of
bear's flesh must rigidly abstain from eating any kind of
fish for a term of two months. The motive for the abstinence
was not any consideration for the health of the eater,
but <q>a superstitious belief, that should any of their people
after tasting bear's flesh, eat of fresh salmon, cod, etc., the
fish, though at ever so great a distance off, would come to
the knowledge of it, and be so much offended thereat, as
not to allow themselves to be taken by any of the inhabitants.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Narrative of the Adventures
and Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</hi>
(Middletown, 1820), p. 116.</note>
The disappearance of herring from the sea about
Heligoland in 1530 was attributed by the fishermen to the
misconduct of two lads who had whipped a freshly-caught
herring and then flung it back into the sea.<note place='foot'>M. J. Schleiden, <hi rend='italic'>Das Salz</hi> (Leipsic,
1875), p. 47. For this reference I am
indebted to my late friend W. Robertson
Smith.</note> A similar
disappearance of the herrings from the Moray Firth, in the
reign of Queen Anne, was set down by some people to a
breach of the Sabbath which had been committed by the
fishermen, while others opined that it was due to a quarrel
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
in which blood had been spilt in the sea.<note place='foot'>Hugh Miller, <hi rend='italic'>Scenes and Legends
of the North of Scotland</hi>, ch. xvii. pp.
256 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Edinburgh, 1889).</note> For Scotch
fishermen are persuaded that if blood be drawn in a quarrel
on the coast where herring are being caught, the shoal will
at once take its departure and not return for that season at
least. West Highland fishermen believe that every shoal of
herring has its leader which it follows wherever he goes.
This leader is twice as big as an ordinary herring, and the
fishermen call it the king of herring. When they chance
to catch it in their nets they put it back carefully into the
sea; for they would esteem it petty treason to destroy the
royal fish.<note place='foot'>M. Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii.
(London, 1809) p. 620.</note> The natives of the Duke of York Island
annually decorate a canoe with flowers and ferns, lade it,
or are supposed to lade it, with shell-money, and set it
adrift to compensate the fish for their fellows who have
been caught and eaten.<note place='foot'>W. Powell, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings in a Wild
Country</hi> (London, 1883), pp. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When the Tarahumares of Mexico
are preparing to poison the waters of a river for the purpose
of stupefying and catching the fish, they take the precaution
of first making offerings to the Master of the Fish by way
of payment for the fish of which they are about to bereave
him. The offerings consist of axes, hats, blankets, girdles,
pouches, and especially knives and strings of beads, which
are hung to a cross or a horizontal bar set up in the middle
of the river. However, the Master of the Fish, who is
thought to be the oldest fish, does not long enjoy these
good things; for next morning the owners of the various
articles remove them from the river and appropriate them to
their usual secular purposes.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), i. 403.</note> It is especially necessary to
treat the first fish caught with consideration in order to
conciliate the rest of the fish, whose conduct may be supposed
to be influenced by the reception given to those of
their kind which were the first to be taken. Accordingly
the Maoris always put back into the sea the first fish caught,
<q>with a prayer that it may tempt other fish to come and be
caught.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui, or
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1870), p.
200; A. S. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Story of
New Zealand</hi> (London, 1859), i. 202;
E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of New
Zealand,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xix. (1890) p. 109.</note> Among the Baganda <q>the first fish taken were
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
treated ceremonially: some the fisherman took to the god
Mukasa; the remainder his wife cooked, and he and she
both partook of them, and he afterwards jumped over her.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 395.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonious
treatment
of the first
fish of the
season.</note>
Still more stringent are the precautions taken when the
fish are the first of the season. On salmon rivers, when the
fish begin to run up the stream in spring, they are received
with much deference by tribes who, like the Indians of the
Pacific Coast of North America, subsist largely upon a fish
diet. To some of these tribes the salmon is what corn is to
the European, rice to the Chinese, and seals to the Esquimaux.
Plenty of salmon means abundance in the camp and joy at
the domestic hearth; failure of the salmon for a single season
means famine and desolation, silence in the village, and sad
hearts about the fire.<note place='foot'>A. G. Morice, <hi rend='italic'>Au pays de l'Ours
Noir</hi> (Paris and Lyons, 1897), p. 28.</note> Accordingly in British Columbia the
Indians used to go out to meet the first fish as they came
up the river: <q>They paid court to them, and would address
them thus: <q>You fish, you fish; you are all chiefs, you are;
you are all chiefs.</q></q><note place='foot'>Sir John Lubbock, <hi rend='italic'>Origin of
Civilisation</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (London, 1882), p. 277,
quoting <hi rend='italic'>Metlahkatlah</hi>, p. 96.</note> Amongst the Thlinkeet or Tlingit of
Alaska the first halibut of the season is carefully handled and
addressed as a chief, and a festival is given in his honour,
after which the fishing goes on.<note place='foot'>W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 413.</note> Among the tribes of the
Lower Fraser River when the first sockeye-salmon of the
season has been caught, the fisherman carries it to the chief
of his tribe, who delivers it to his wife. She prays, saying
to the salmon, <q>Who has brought you here to make us
happy? We are thankful to your chief for sending you.</q>
When she has cut and roasted the salmon according to
certain prescribed rules, the whole tribe is invited and partakes
of the fish, after they have purified themselves by
drinking a decoction of certain plants which is regarded as
a medicine for cleansing the people. But widowers, widows,
menstruous women, and youths may not eat of this particular
salmon. Even later, when the fish have become plentiful
and these ceremonies are dispensed with, the same classes of
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
persons are not allowed to eat fresh salmon, though they
may partake of the dried fish. The sockeye-salmon must
always be looked after carefully. Its bones have to be
thrown into the river, after which the fish will revive and
return to its chief in the west. Whereas if the fish are not
treated with consideration, they will take their revenge, and
the careless fisherman will be unlucky.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <q>Ninth Report on
the North-Western Tribes of Canada,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1894</hi>, p. 461. Compare J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The
Lillooet Indians</hi> (Leyden and New
York, 1906), pp. 280 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>); C. Hill Tout, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxv.
(1905) p. 140; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Far West,
the Home of the Salish and Déné</hi>
(London, 1907), pp. 170-172.</note> Among the Songish
or Lkungen tribe of Vancouver Island it is a rule that on
the day when the first salmon have been caught, the children
must stand on the beach waiting for the boats to return.
They stretch out their little arms and the salmon are heaped on
them, the heads of the fish being always kept in the direction
in which the salmon are swimming, else they would cease to
run up the river. So the children carry them and lay them
on a grassy place, carefully keeping the heads of the salmon
turned in the same direction. Round the fish are placed
four flat stones, on which the plant hog's wort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Peucedanum
leiocarpum</foreign>, Nutt.), red paint, and bulrushes are burnt as an
offering to the salmon. When the salmon have been roasted
each of the children receives one, which he or she is obliged
to eat, leaving nothing over. But grown people are not
allowed to eat the fish for several days. The bones of the
salmon that the children have eaten may not touch the
ground. They are kept in dishes, and on the fourth day an
old woman, who pretends to be lame, gathers them in a
huge basket and throws them into the sea.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, pp. 16
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1890</hi>).</note> The Tsimshian
Indians of British Columbia observe certain ceremonies when
the first olachen fish of the season are caught. The fish are
roasted on an instrument of elder-berry wood, and the man
who roasts them must wear his travelling dress, mittens, cape,
and so forth. While this is being done the Indians pray
that plenty of olachen may come to their fishing-ground.
The fire may not be blown up, and in eating the fish they
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
may not cool it by blowing nor break a single bone. Everything
must be neat and clean, and the rakes used for catching
the fish must be kept hidden in the house.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Fifth Report on the North-Western
Tribes of Canada</hi>, p. 51 (separate
reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British
Association for 1889</hi>).</note> In spring,
when the winds blow soft from the south and the salmon
begin to run up the Klamath river, the Karoks of California
dance for salmon, to ensure a good catch. One of the
Indians, called the Kareya or God-man, retires to the
mountains and fasts for ten days. On his return the people
flee, while he goes to the river, takes the first salmon of the
catch, eats some of it, and with the rest kindles the sacred
fire in the sweating-house. <q>No Indian may take a salmon
before this dance is held, nor for ten days after it, even if his
family are starving.</q> The Karoks also believe that a fisherman
will take no salmon if the poles of which his spearing-booth
is made were gathered on the river-side, where the
salmon might have seen them. The poles must be brought
from the top of the highest mountain. The fisherman will
also labour in vain if he uses the same poles a second year
in booths or weirs, <q>because the old salmon will have told
the young ones about them.</q><note place='foot'>Stephen Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Indians of the
Columbia River, <q>when the salmon make their first appearance
in the river, they are never allowed to be cut crosswise,
nor boiled, but roasted; nor are they allowed to be sold
without the heart being first taken out, nor to be kept over
night, but must be all consumed or eaten the day they are
taken out of the water. All these rules are observed for
about ten days.</q><note place='foot'>Alex. Ross, <hi rend='italic'>Adventures of the First
Settlers on the Oregon or Columbia
River</hi> (London, 1849), p. 97.</note> They think that if the heart of a fish were
eaten by a stranger at the beginning of the season, they
would catch no more fish. Hence, they roast and eat the
hearts themselves.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the United
States Exploring Expedition</hi>, New Edition
(New York, 1851), iv. 324, v. 119,
where it is said, <q>a dog must never be
permitted to eat the heart of a salmon;
and in order to prevent this, they cut
the heart of the fish out before they
sell it.</q></note> There is a favourite fish of the Aino
which appears in their rivers about May and June. They
prepare for the fishing by observing rules of ceremonial
purity, and when they have gone out to fish, the women at
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
home must keep strict silence or the fish would hear them
and disappear. When the first fish is caught he is brought
home and passed through a small opening at the end of the
hut, but not through the door; for if he were passed through
the door, <q>the other fish would certainly see him and disappear.</q><note place='foot'>H. C. St. John, <q>The Ainos,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
ii. (1873) p. 253; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Notes and
Sketches from the Wild Coasts of
Nipon</hi>, pp. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similarly it is a
rule with the Aino to bring the flesh of
bears and other game into the house,
not by the door, but by the window or
the smoke-hole. See Rev. J. Batchelor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and their Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1901), p. 123; P. Labbé, <hi rend='italic'>Un Bagne
Russe</hi> (Paris, 1903), pp. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
This may partly explain the custom observed by
other savages of bringing game in certain cases into their
huts, not by the door, but by the window, the smoke-hole,
or by a special opening at the back of the hut.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Anthropologie</hi>, xxvi.
(1900) p. 796 (as to the Gilyak of
the Amoor); J. Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi>
(Frankfort, 1673), pp. 242 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; C.
Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
eorumque lingua, vita, et religione pristina
commentatio</hi> (Copenhagen, 1767),
p. 503; <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>, ii.
(1883) pp. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, vii. (1878)
p. 207; Fr. Boas, <q>The Central
Eskimo,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1888), p. 595; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The Eskimo of
Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
of the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. (1901) p. 148; A. G.
Morice, in <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Canadian
Institute</hi>, iv. (1892-93) p. 108.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Some
savages
preserve
the bones
of the
animals
they kill in
order that
the animals
may come
to life
again.</note>
With some savages a special reason for respecting the
bones of game, and generally of the animals which they eat,
is a belief that, if the bones are preserved, they will in
course of time be reclothed with flesh, and thus the animal
will come to life again. It is, therefore, clearly for the
interest of the hunter to leave the bones intact, since to
destroy them would be to diminish the future supply of
game. Many of the Minnetaree Indians <q>believe that the
bones of those bisons which they have slain and divested of
flesh rise again clothed with renewed flesh, and quickened
with life, and become fat, and fit for slaughter the succeeding
June.</q><note place='foot'>E. James, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition from Pittsburgh
to the Rocky Mountains</hi> (London,
1823), i. 257.</note> Hence on the western prairies of America, the
skulls of buffaloes may be seen arranged in circles and symmetrical
piles, awaiting the resurrection.<note place='foot'>D. G. Brinton, <hi rend='italic'>Myths of the New
World</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (New York, 1876), p. 278.</note> After feasting on
a dog, the Dacotas carefully collect the bones, scrape, wash,
and bury them, <q>partly, as it is said, to testify to the dog-species,
that in feasting upon one of their number no disrespect
was meant to the species itself, and partly also from
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
a belief that the bones of the animal will rise and reproduce
another.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Keating, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition to the
Source of St. Peter's River</hi> (London,
1825), i. 452.</note> Among the Esquimaux of Baffin Land and
Hudson Bay, when a boy has killed his first seal, his mother
gathers all the bones and throws them into a seal-hole.
They think that these bones will become seals which the
boy will catch in later life.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Eskimo of Baffin
Land and Hudson Bay,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, xv. (1901) p. 161.</note> The Yuracares Indians of
Bolivia are at great pains to collect all the bones of the
beasts, birds, and fishes which they eat, and to throw them
into a stream, bury them in the depths of the forest, or burn
them in the fire, <q>in order that the animals of the sort killed
may not be angry and may allow themselves to be killed
again.</q><note place='foot'>A. d'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Amérique
Méridionale</hi>, iii. (Paris and
Strasburg, 1844) p. 201. However,
in this case a belief in the resurrection
of the animals is not expressly affirmed,
and the practice of burning the bones
seems inconsistent with it.</note> In sacrificing an animal the Lapps regularly
put aside the bones, eyes, ears, heart, lungs, sexual parts (if
the animal was a male), and a morsel of flesh from each limb.
Then, after eating the remainder of the flesh, they laid the
bones and the rest in anatomical order in a coffin and buried
them with the usual rites, believing that the god to whom
the animal was sacrificed would reclothe the bones with flesh
and restore the animal to life in Jabme-Aimo, the subterranean
world of the dead. Sometimes, as after feasting
on a bear, they seem to have contented themselves with thus
burying the bones.<note place='foot'>E. J. Jessen, <hi rend='italic'>De Finnorum Lapponumque
Norwegicorum religione
pagana tractatus singularis</hi>, pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 65 (bound with C. Leem's
<hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque
lingua, vita et religione pristina commentatio</hi>,
Copenhagen, 1767). Compare
Leem's work, pp. 418-420, 428
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Acerbi, <hi rend='italic'>Travels through Sweden,
Finnland, and Lapland</hi> (London,
1802), ii. 302.</note> Thus the Lapps expected the resurrection
of the slain animal to take place in another world,
resembling in this respect the Kamtchatkans, who believed
that every creature, down to the smallest fly, would rise from
the dead and live underground.<note place='foot'>G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung von
dem Lande Kamtschatka</hi> (Frankfort and
Leipsic, 1774), p. 269; S. Krascheninnikow,
<hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung des Landes
Kamtschatka</hi> (Lemgo, 1766), p. 246.</note> On the other hand, the
North American Indians looked for the resurrection of the
animals in the present world. The habit, observed especially
by Mongolian peoples, of stuffing the skin of a sacrificed
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
animal, or stretching it on a framework,<note place='foot'>See A. Erman, referred to above,
p. 223; J. G. Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch
Sibirien</hi> (Göttingen, 1751-1752), i.
274, ii. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 214; H. Vambery,
<hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi> (Leipsic, 1885), pp.
118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> When a fox, the sacred animal
of the Conchucos in Peru, had been
killed, its skin was stuffed and set up
(A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer des
alten Amerika</hi>, i. 443). Compare the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>bouphonia</foreign>, above, pp. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> points rather to a
belief in a resurrection of the latter sort. The objection
commonly entertained by primitive peoples to break the
bones of the animals which they have eaten or sacrificed<note place='foot'>At the annual sacrifice of the
White Dog, the Iroquois were careful
to strangle the animal without shedding
its blood or breaking its bones; the
dog was afterwards burned (L. H.
Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the Iroquois</hi>, Rochester,
1851, p. 210). It is a rule
with some of the Australian blacks
that in killing the native bear they
may not break his bones. They say
that the native bear once stole all the
water of the river, and that if they were
to break his bones or take off his skin
before roasting him, he would do so
again (R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 447 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). Some of the
Queensland aborigines believe that if
the bones or skulls of dugong were not
put away in a heap or otherwise preserved,
no more dugong would be
caught (W. E. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>North Queensland
Ethnography</hi>, Bulletin No. 5,
Brisbane, 1903, p. 27). When the
Tartars whom Carpini visited killed
animals for eating, they might not break
their bones but burned them with fire
(Carpini, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Mongalorum</hi> (Paris,
1838), cap. iii. § i. 2, p. 620). North
American Indians might not break the
bones of the animals which they ate at
feasts (Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi>, vi. 72). In the war feast
held by Indian warriors after leaving
home, a whole animal was cooked and
had to be all eaten. No bone of it might
be broken. After being stripped of the
flesh the bones were hung on a tree
(<hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures
of John Tanner</hi>, London, 1830,
p. 287). On St. Olaf's Day (29th
July) the Karels of Finland kill a lamb,
without using a knife, and roast it whole.
None of its bones may be broken. The
lamb has not been shorn since spring.
Some of the flesh is placed in a corner
of the room for the house-spirits, some
is deposited on the field and beside the
birch-trees which are destined to be
used as May-trees next year (W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, pp.
160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, note). Some of the Esquimaux
in skinning a deer are careful not to
break a single bone, and they will not
break the bones of deer while walrus
are being hunted (Fr. Boas, <q>The
Central Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1888), pp. 595 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). The Innuit (Esquimaux)
of Point Barrow, Alaska, carefully
preserve unbroken the bones of
the seals which they have caught and
return them to the sea, either leaving
them in an ice-crack far out from the
land or dropping them through a hole
in the ice. By doing so they think
they secure good fortune in the pursuit
of seals (<hi rend='italic'>Report of the International
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</hi>
(Washington, 1885), p. 40). In this
last custom the idea probably is that
the bones will be reclothed with flesh
and the seals come to life again. The
Mosquito Indians of Central America
carefully preserved the bones of deer
and the shells of eggs, lest the deer or
chickens should die or disappear (H. H.
Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific
States</hi>, i. 741). In Syria at the present
time people offer a sacrifice for a boy
when he is seven days old, and they
will not break a bone of the victim,
<q>because they fear that if a bone of the
sacrifice should be broken, the child's
bones would be broken, too</q> (S. I.
Curtiss, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Semitic Religion
To-day</hi>, Chicago, etc., 1902, p. 178).
This last may be a later misinterpretation
of the old custom. For West
African cases of refusal to break the
bones of sacrificial victims, see J. Spieth,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin, 1906), pp.
458, 466, 480, 527, 712, 796, 824.
Amongst the Narrinyeri of South
Australia, when an animal was being
cut up, the bystanders used to leap and
yell as often as a bone was broken,
thinking that if they did not do so
their own bones would rot within them
(A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi>, p. 763).</note>
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
may be based either on a belief in the resurrection of the
animals, or on a fear of intimidating other creatures of the
same species and offending the ghosts of the slain animals.
The reluctance of North American Indians and Esquimaux
to let dogs gnaw the bones of animals<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1634, p.
25 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858);
A. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages through the
Continent of America</hi> (London, 1801),
p. civ.; J. Dunn, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Oregon
Territory</hi> (London, 1844), p. 99; F.
Whymper, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal
Geographical Society</hi>, xxxviii. (1868)
p. 228; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society</hi>, N.S., vii. (1869)
p. 174; A. P. Reid, <q>Religious
Belief of the Ojibois Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, iii.
(1874) p. 111; Fr. Boas, <q>The
Central Eskimo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sixth Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1888), p. 596; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The Eskimo
of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History</hi>, xv. (1901) p. 123;
E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo about
Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington, 1899)
pp. 438 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For more examples see
above, pp. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>. After a meal the Indians
of Costa Rica gather all the bones
carefully and either burn them or put
them out of reach of the dogs. See
W. M. Gabb, <hi rend='italic'>On the Indian Tribes
and Languages of Costa Rica</hi> (read
before the American Philosophical
Society, 20th Aug. 1875), p. 520
(Philadelphia, 1875). The custom of
burning the bones to prevent the dogs
getting them does not necessarily contradict
the view suggested in the text. It
may be a way of transmitting the bones
to the spirit-land. The aborigines of
Australia burn the bones of the animals
which they eat, but for a different
reason; they think that if an enemy
got hold of the bones and burned them
with charms, it would cause the death
of the person who had eaten the animal
(<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
Adelaide, 1879, pp. 24, 196).</note> is perhaps only a
precaution to prevent the bones from being broken.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Some
savages
preserve or
destroy the
bones of
men in
order to
assist or
prevent
their resurrection.</note>
We have already seen that some rude races believe in
a resurrection of men<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, pp. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> as well as of beasts, and it is quite
natural that people who entertain such a belief should take
care of the bones of their dead in order that the original
owners of the bones may have them to hand at the critical
moment. Hence in the Mexican territories of Guazacualco
and Yluta, where the Indians thought that the dead would
rise again, the bones of the departed were deposited in
baskets and hung up on trees, that their spirits might not
be obliged to grub in the earth for them at the resurrection.<note place='foot'>A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History
of the vast Continent and Islands of
America</hi>, translated by Capt. John
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv.
126.</note>
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
On the other hand, the Luritcha tribe of Central Australia,
who eat their enemies, take steps to prevent their coming to
life again, which might prove very inconvenient, by destroying
the bones and especially the skulls of the bodies on
which they have banqueted.<note place='foot'>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1899), p. 475.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Unquestioning
faith of
savages in
the immortality
of animals.
The savage
faith in
human immortality
is
commonly
supposed to
be deduced
from a
primitive
theory of
dreams.</note>
The preceding review of customs observed by savages
for the conciliation and multiplication of animals which they
hunt and kill, is fitted to impress us with a lively sense of
the unquestioning faith which primitive man reposes in the
immortality of the lower creatures. He appears to assume
as an axiom too obvious to be disputed that beasts, birds,
and fishes have souls like his own, which survive the death
of their bodies and can be reborn in other bodies to be
again killed and eaten by the hunter. The whole series of
customs described in the foregoing pages&mdash;customs which
are apt to strike the civilised reader as quaint and absurd&mdash;rests
on this fundamental assumption. A consideration of
them suggests a doubt whether the current explanation of
the savage belief in human immortality is adequate to
account for all the facts. That belief is commonly deduced
from a primitive theory of dreams. The savage, it is said,
fails to distinguish the visions of sleep from the realities of
waking life, and accordingly when he has dreamed of his dead
friends he necessarily concludes that they have not wholly
perished, but that their spirits continue to exist in some
place and some form, though in the ordinary course of
events they elude the perceptions of his senses. On this
theory the conceptions, whether gross or refined, whether
repulsive or beautiful, which savages and perhaps civilised
men have formed of the state of the departed, would seem
to be no more than elaborate hypotheses constructed to
account for appearances in dreams; these towering structures,
for all their radiant or gloomy grandeur, for all
the massy strength and solidity with which they present
themselves to the imagination of many, may turn out on
inspection to be mere visionary castles built of clouds and
vapour, which a breath of reason suffices to melt into air.
</p>

<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But can a
theory of
dreams
account for
the savage
belief in
the immortality
of
animals?</note>
But even if we grant for the sake of argument that this
theory offers a ready explanation of the widespread belief
in human immortality, it is less easy to see how the theory
accounts for the corresponding belief of so many races in
the immortality of the lower animals. In his dreams the
savage recognises the images of his departed friends by those
familiar traits of feature, voice, and gesture which characterised
them in life. But can we suppose that he
recognises dead beasts, birds, and fishes in like manner?
That their images come before him in sleep with all the
particular features, the minute individual differences, which
distinguished them in life from their fellows, so that when
he sees them he can say to himself, for example, <q>This is
the very tiger that I speared yesterday; his carcase is dead,
but his spirit must be still alive</q>; or, <q>That is the very salmon
I caught and ate this morning; I certainly killed his body
but clearly I have not succeeded in destroying his soul</q>?
No doubt it is possible that the savage has arrived at his
theory of animal immortality by some such process of
reasoning, but the supposition seems at least more far-fetched
and improbable than in the case of human
immortality. And if we admit the insufficiency of the
explanation in the one case, we seem bound to admit it,
though perhaps in a less degree, in the other case also. In
short, we conclude that the theory of dreams appears to be
hardly enough by itself to account for the widespread belief in
the immortality of men and animals; dreams have probably
done much to confirm that belief, but would they suffice to
originate it? We may reasonably doubt it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Apparently
the savage
conceives
life as an
indestructible
form of
energy. Analogy of
the conception
to
the modern
scientific
conception
of the conservation
of
energy.</note>
Accordingly we are driven to cast about for some more
adequate explanation of this prevalent and deeply rooted persuasion.
In search of such an explanation perhaps we need
go no further than the sense of life which every man feels in
his own breast.<note place='foot'>For this suggestion I am indebted
to a hint thrown out in conversation
by my friend Professor G. F. Stout.</note> We have seen that to the savage death
presents itself not as a natural necessity but as a lamentable
accident or crime that cuts short an existence which, but for
it, might have lasted for ever.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 1.</note> Thus arguing apparently from
his own sensations he conceives of life as an indestructible
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
kind of energy, which when it disappears in one form must
necessarily reappear in another, though in the new form it
need not be immediately perceptible by us; in other words,
he infers that death does not destroy the vital principle
nor even the conscious personality, but that it merely
transforms both of them into other shapes, which are not
the less real because they commonly elude the evidence
of our senses. If I am right in thus interpreting the
thought of primitive man, the savage view of the nature
of life singularly resembles the modern scientific doctrine
of the conservation of energy. According to that doctrine,
no material energy ever perishes or is even diminished;
when it seems to suffer diminution or extinction, all that
happens is that a portion or the whole of it has been
transmuted into other shapes which, though qualitatively
different from, are quantitatively equivalent to, the energy in
its original form. In short, if we listen to science, nothing
in the physical world is ever lost, but all things are perpetually
changing: the sum of energy in the universe is
constant and invariable, though it undergoes ceaseless
transformations.<note place='foot'>The principle of the conservation
of energy is clearly stated and illustrated
by Balfour Stewart in his book
<hi rend='italic'>The Conservation of Energy</hi>, Fourth
Edition (London, 1877). The writer
does not countenance the view that
life is a form of energy distinct from
and independent of physical and chemical
forces; he regards a living being
simply as a very delicately constructed
machine in which the natural forces
are in a state of unstable equilibrium.
To avoid misapprehension it may be
well to add that I do not pretend to
argue either for or against the theory
of life which appears to be implicitly
adopted by the savage; my aim is
simply to explain, not to justify or condemn,
the mental attitude of primitive
man towards these profound problems.</note> A similar theory of the indestructibility
of energy is implicitly applied by the savage to explain the
phenomena of life and death, and logically enough he does
not limit the application to human beings but extends it
to the lower animals. Therein he shews himself a better
reasoner than his civilised brother, who commonly embraces
with avidity the doctrine of human immortality but rejects
with scorn, as derogatory to human dignity, the idea that
animals have immortal souls. And when he attempts to
confirm his own cherished belief in a life after death by
appealing to similar beliefs among savages and inferring
from them a natural instinct of immortality, it is well to
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
remind him that, if he stands by that appeal, he must, like
the savage, consistently extend the privilege of immortality
to the despised lower animals; for surely it is improper for
him to pick and choose his evidence so as to suit his
prepossessions, accepting those parts of the savage creed
which tally with his own and rejecting those which do not.
On logical and scientific grounds he seems bound to believe
either more or less: he must hold that men and animals
are alike immortal or that neither of them is so.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The resurrection
of
the body in
tales and
legends.</note>
We have seen that many savages look forward to a
joyful resurrection of men and beasts, if only a proper
care is taken of their skeletons; the same old bones, they
imagine, will do duty over again in the next life, when
they have been decently clad in a new garment of flesh.
This quaint fancy is reflected in many popular tales; not
uncommonly the animal or man in the story comes to life
lame of a limb, because one of his bones has been eaten,
broken, or lost.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>
(Berlin, 1858), pp. 57-74; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 116; C. L. Rochholz,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</hi> (Berlin,
1867), i. 219 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Curtin, <hi rend='italic'>Myths
and Folk-lore of Ireland</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
pp. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Cosquin, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires
de Lorraine</hi> (Paris, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), ii. 25;
E. S. Hartland, <q>The Physicians of
Myddfai,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archaeological Review</hi>, i.
(1888) pp. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In folk-tales, as in
primitive custom, the blood is sometimes
not allowed to fall on the ground. See
E. Cosquin, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In a Magyar tale, the hero is cut in pieces,
but the serpent-king lays the bones together in their proper
order, and washes them with water, whereupon the hero revives.
His shoulder-blade, however, has been lost, so the serpent-king
supplies its place with one of gold and ivory.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>,
p. 66.</note> Such
stories, as Mannhardt has seen, explain why Pythagoras,
who claimed to have lived many lives, one after the other,
was said to have exhibited his golden leg as a proof of his
supernatural pretensions.<note place='foot'>Jamblichus, <hi rend='italic'>Vita Pythag.</hi> 92, 135,
140; Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>Vita Pythag.</hi> 28.</note> Doubtless he explained that at
one of his resurrections a leg had been broken or mislaid,
and that he had replaced it, like Miss Kilmansegg, with
one of gold. Similarly, when the murdered Pelops was
restored to life, the shoulder which Demeter had eaten was
made good with one of ivory,<note place='foot'>Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, with
the Scholiast.</note> which was publicly exhibited
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
at Elis down to historical times.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 34.</note> The story that one of the
members of the mangled Osiris was eaten by fish, and that,
when Isis collected his scattered limbs, she replaced the
missing member with one of wood,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18. This
is one of the sacred stories which the
pious Herodotus (ii. 48) concealed and
the pious Plutarch divulged.</note> may perhaps belong to
the same circle of beliefs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sinew
of the thigh
regularly
cut out and
thrown
away by
some
American
Indians.</note>
There is a certain rule observed by savage hunters and
fishers which, enigmatical at first sight, may possibly be
explained by this savage belief in resurrection. A traveller
in America in the early part of the nineteenth century was
told by a half-breed Choctaw that the Indians <q>had an obscure
story, somewhat resembling that of Jacob wrestling with an
angel; and that the full-blooded Indians always separate the
sinew which shrank, and that it is never seen in the venison exposed
for sale; he did not know what they did with it. His
elder brother, whom I afterwards met, told me that they eat it
as a rarity; but I have also heard, though on less respectable
authority, that they refrain from it, like the ancient Jews.
A gentleman, who had lived on the Indian frontier, or in the
nation, for ten or fifteen years, told me that he had often
been surprised that the Indians always detached this sinew;
but it had never occurred to him to inquire the reason.</q><note place='foot'>Adam Hodgson, <hi rend='italic'>Letters from
North America</hi> (London, 1824), i. 244.</note>
James Adair, who knew the Indians of the South-Eastern
States intimately, and whose absurd theories appear not to
have distorted his view of the facts, observes that <q>when in
the woods, the Indians cut a small piece out of the lower
part of the thighs of the deer they kill, lengthways and pretty
deep. Among the great number of venison-hams they bring
to our trading-houses, I do not remember to have observed
one without it.... And I have been assured by a gentleman
of character, who is now an inhabitant of South
Carolina, and well acquainted with the customs of the
northern Indians, that they also cut a piece out of the thigh
of every deer they kill, and throw it away; and reckon it
such a dangerous pollution to eat it as to occasion sickness
and other misfortunes of sundry kinds, especially by spoiling
their guns from shooting with proper force and direction.</q><note place='foot'>J. Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi> (London, 1775), pp. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
This writer, animated by a curious
though not uncommon passion for discovering
the ten lost tribes of Israel,
imagined that he detected the missing
Hebrews disguised under the red skins
and beardless faces of the American
Indians.</note>
</p>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Story told
by the
Indians to
explain the
custom.</note>
In more recent times the statement of Adair's informant
has been confirmed by a French missionary, who has also
published the <q>obscure story</q> to which the English traveller
Hodgson refers. The Loucheux and Hare-skin Indians who
roam the bleak steppes and forests that stretch from Hudson's
Bay to the Rocky Mountains, and northward to the
frozen sea, are forbidden by custom to eat the sinew of the
legs of animals. To explain this custom they tell the following
<q>sacred story.</q> Once upon a time a man found a
burrow of porcupines, and going down into it after the
porcupines he lost his way in the darkness, till a kind giant
called <q>He who sees before and behind</q> released him by
cleaving open the earth. So the man, whose name was
<q>Fireless and Homeless,</q> lived with the kind giant, and
the giant hunted elans and beavers for him, and carried him
about in the sheath of his flint knife. <q>But know, my son,</q>
said the giant, <q>that he who uses the sky as his head is
angry with me, and has sworn my destruction. If he slays
me the clouds will be tinged with my blood; they will be
red with it, probably.</q> Then he gave the man an axe made
of the tooth of a gigantic beaver, and went forth to meet his
foe. But from under the ice the man heard a dull muffled
sound. It was a whale which was making this noise because
it was naked and cold. Warned by the man, the giant went
toward the whale, which took human shape, and rushed upon
the giant. It was the wicked giant, the kind giant's enemy.
The two struggled together for a long time, till the kind
giant cried, <q>Oh, my son! cut, cut the sinew of the leg.</q>
The man cut the sinew, and the wicked giant fell down and
was slain. That is why the Indians do not eat the sinew of
the leg. Afterwards, one day the sky suddenly flushed a
fiery red, so Fireless and Homeless knew that the kind giant
was no more, and he wept.<note place='foot'>É. Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie des Dènè-Dindjie</hi>
(Paris, 1867), pp. 77, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions indiennes du Canada
Nord-ouest</hi> (Paris, 1886), pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
compare pp. 41, 76, 213, 264. The
story is told in a briefer form, though
without any reference to the custom, by
another French missionary. See the
letter of Mgr. Tache, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, xxiv. (1852) pp.
336 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
custom of
cutting out
the sinew of
the thigh
in animals
seems to be
based on
the principle
of
sympathetic
magic.</note>
This myth, it is almost needless to observe, does not
really explain the custom. People do not usually observe
a custom because on a particular occasion a mythical
being is said to have acted in a certain way. But, on
the contrary, they very often invent myths to explain
why they practise certain customs. Dismissing, therefore,
the story of Fireless and Homeless as a myth invented to
explain why the Indians abstain from eating a particular
sinew, it may be suggested<note place='foot'>The first part of this suggestion is
due to my friend W. Robertson Smith.
See his <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on the Religion of the
Semites</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1894), p. 380, note
1. The Faleshas, a Jewish sect of
Abyssinia, after killing an animal for
food, <q>carefully remove the vein from
the thighs with its surrounding flesh.</q>
See Halévy, <q>Travels in Abyssinia,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Publications of the Society of Hebrew
Literature</hi>, Second Series, vol. ii. p.
220. Caffre men will not eat the
sinew of the thigh; <q>it is carefully
cut out and sent to the principal boy at
the kraal, who with his companions
consider it as their right.</q> See Col.
Maclean, <hi rend='italic'>Kafir Laws and Customs</hi>
(Cape Town, 1866), p. 151. Gallas who
pride themselves on their descent will
not eat the flesh of the biceps; the
reasons assigned for the custom are
inconsistent and unsatisfactory. See
Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas:
die materielle Cultur der
Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi> (Berlin,
1893), p. 154. When the Bushmen
kill a hare, they cut out a sinew of
the thigh and will not eat it, alleging
as their reason that the hare was once
a man, and that this particular sinew
is still human flesh. See W. H. I.
Bleek and L. C. Lloyd. <hi rend='italic'>Specimens of
Bushman Folklore</hi> (London, 1911),
pp. xxxix., 60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 63.</note> that the original reason for
observing the custom was a belief that the sinew in question
was necessary to reproduction, and that deprived of it the
slain animals could not come to life again and stock the
steppes and prairies either of the present world or of the
spirit land. We have seen that the resurrection of animals
is a common article of savage faith, and that when the Lapps
bury the skeleton of the male bear in the hope of its resurrection
they are careful to bury the genital parts along with it.
However, subsequent enquiries make it probable that the Indian
practice of cutting out the hamstring of deer has no other object
than that of preventing eaters of venison from going lame.
Among the Cherokee, we are told, <q>on killing a deer the
hunter always makes an incision in the hind quarter and
removes the hamstring, because this tendon, when severed,
draws up into the flesh; ergo, any one who should unfortunately
partake of the hamstring would find his limbs
drawn up in the same manner.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Sacred Formulas of
the Cherokees,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Seventh Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1891), p. 323. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Myths of the Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington,
1900) pp. 267, 447. In the last
of these passages the writer quotes
Buttrick, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, p. 12, as follows:
<q>The Indians never used to eat a
certain sinew in the thigh.... Some
say that if they eat of the sinew they
will have cramp in it on attempting to
run. It is said that once a woman had
cramp in that sinew, and therefore
none must eat it.</q></note> Thus the superstition
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
seems to rest on the common principle of homoeopathic
or imitative magic, that an eater infects himself with the
qualities of the animal of whose flesh he partakes. Many
instances of the application of that principle have met us
already.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Some
hunters
hamstring
the dead
game in
order to
lame the
ghosts
of the
animals.
Some
savages put
out the eyes
of dead
game in
order perhaps
to
blind the
ghosts
of the
animals.</note>
But some hunters hamstring the game for a different
purpose; they hope thereby to prevent the dead beast or its
ghost from getting up and running away. This is the motive
alleged for the practice by Koui hunters in Laos; they
think that the spells which they utter in the chase may lose
their magical virtue, and that the slaughtered animal may
consequently come to life again and escape. To prevent that
catastrophe they therefore hamstring the beast as soon as
they have butchered it.<note place='foot'>É. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>
(Saigon, 1885), p. 23.</note> When an Esquimau of Alaska has
killed a fox, he carefully cuts the tendons of all the animal's
legs in order to prevent the ghost from reanimating the body
and walking about.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington,
1899) p. 423.</note> But hamstringing the carcase is not the
only measure which the prudent savage adopts for the sake of
disabling the ghost of his victim. In old days, when the Aino
went out hunting and killed a fox first, they took care to tie
its mouth up tightly in order to prevent the ghost of the
animal from sallying forth and warning its fellows against
the approach of the hunter.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), p.
504.</note> The Gilyaks of the Amoor
River put out the eyes of the seals they have killed, lest the
ghosts of the slain animals should know their slayers and
avenge their death by spoiling the seal-hunt.<note place='foot'>L. von Schrenck, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen und
Forschungen im Amur-Lande</hi>, iii.
546.</note> The custom
of putting out the eyes of slaughtered animals appears to be
not uncommon among primitive peoples, and we may suspect
that even where a different reason is alleged for it, the true
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
original motive was to blind the dangerous ghost of the
injured creature, and so to incapacitate it for retaliating on
the slayer. Thus, when a Samoyed has killed a wild reindeer,
one of the first things he does is to cut out the eyes
and throw them away <q>in order to ensure a good bag in
future</q>; and he buries the eyes in some place where no
woman or adult girl is likely to step over them, since that
also would spoil his luck in the chase.<note place='foot'>P. S. Pallas, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch verschiedene
Provinzen des Russischen Reichs</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1771-1776), iii. 70.</note> Among the tribes
of South-east Africa hunters pluck out the right eye of any
animal they have killed and pour a charmed medicine into
the empty socket.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in
Africa</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1890), p. 171.</note> Among the Thompson Indians of
British Columbia a man whose daughter has just arrived
at puberty may not hunt or trap for a month, or he will
have no luck. Moreover, he should cut off the head of the
first grouse he snares, pluck out the eyes, and insert two
small roots of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Zygadenus elegans</foreign> Pursch. in the orbits and
another in its mouth, and having done so he ought to
hang up the bird's head above his pillow. If he neglects
these precautions, he will not be able to snare any more
grouse or other small game.<note place='foot'>J. Teit, <hi rend='italic'>The Thompson Indians
cf British Columbia</hi>, p. 317 (<hi rend='italic'>The
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir
of the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>, April, 1900).</note> No doubt the ceremonial
pollution contracted by his daughter at this critical period
of her life is supposed to infect the hunter and render
him unacceptable to the game;<note place='foot'>So among the Esquimaux of
Bering Strait a girl at puberty is considered
unclean. <q>A peculiar atmosphere
is supposed to surround her at
this time, and if a young man should
come near enough for it to touch him
it would render him visible to every
animal he might hunt, so that his
success as a hunter would be gone.</q>
See E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology</hi>, Part i. (Washington,
1899) p. 291.</note> hence it seems a mere
elementary dictate of prudence to hoodwink the grouse
effectually by putting out their eyes. Sometimes, perhaps,
the cutting out of the eyes of fierce and powerful
animals may be a rational, not a superstitious, precaution.
Thus the Kamtchatkans, who stab with knives the eyes
of slain bears before they cut the carcases up, allege as
their reason for doing so that bears which seem to be dead
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
of their wounds will sometimes revive and kill their would-be
killers.<note place='foot'>P. Dobell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Kamtchatka
and Siberia</hi> (London, 1830), i. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
custom of
cutting out
the tongues
of dead
animals
may sometimes
be
intended to
prevent
their ghosts
from telling
tales. Tongues of
animals cut
out in order
to confer
superhuman
knowledge
or power
on their
possessors.</note>
It appears to be a common custom with savage hunters
to cut out the tongues of the animals which they kill. On
the analogy of the foregoing customs we may conjecture that
the removal of the tongues is sometimes a precaution to
prevent the ghosts of the creatures from telling their sad
fate to their sympathising comrades, the living animals of
the same sort, who would naturally be frightened, and
so keep out of the hunter's way. Thus, for example,
Omaha hunters remove the tongue of a slain buffalo
through an opening made in the animal's throat. The
tongues thus removed are sacred and may not touch any
tool or metal except when they are boiling in the kettles at
the sacred tent. They are eaten as sacred food.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Omaha
Sociology,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1884), pp.
289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Indian
bear-hunters cut out what they call the bear's little tongue (a
fleshy mass under the real tongue) and keep it for good luck
in hunting or burn it to determine, from its crackling and
so on, whether the soul of the slain bear is angry with them
or not.<note place='foot'>J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi> (Bremen,
1859), ii. 251 sq.; Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
de la Nouvelle France</hi>, v. 173; Chateaubriand,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage en Amérique</hi>, pp. 179
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 184.</note> In folk-tales the hero commonly cuts out the tongue
of the wild beast which he has slain and preserves it as a
token. The incident serves to shew that the custom was a
common one, since folk-tales reflect with accuracy the customs
and beliefs of a primitive age.<note place='foot'>For examples of the incident, see
J. F. Bladé, <hi rend='italic'>Contes populaires recueillis
en Agenais</hi> (Paris, 1874), pp. 12, 14;
G. W. Dasent, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Tales from
the Norse</hi> (Edinburgh, 1859), pp. 133
sq. (<q>Shortshanks</q>); Aug. Schleicher,
<hi rend='italic'>Litauische Märchen</hi> (Weimar, 1857),
p. 58; Sepp, <hi rend='italic'>Altbayerischer Sagenschatz</hi>
(Munich, 1876), p. 114; R.
Köhler, on L. Gonzenbach's <hi rend='italic'>Sicilianische
Märchen</hi> (Leipsic, 1870), ii. 230;
Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 13. 3;
Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, <hi rend='italic'>Argonaut.</hi>
i. 517; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p.
53; J. C. Poestion, <hi rend='italic'>Lappländische
Märchen</hi> (Vienna, 1876), pp. 231 sq.;
A. F. Chamberlain, in <hi rend='italic'>Eighth Report
on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>,
p. 35 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report
of the British Association for 1892</hi>);
I. V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Kinder und Hausmärchen
aus Tirol</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gera, 1870), No.
25, p. 127; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848), p. 342;
S. Grundtvig, <hi rend='italic'>Dänische Volksmärchen</hi>,
übersetzt von W. Leo (Leipsic, 1878),
p. 289; A. Leskien und K. Brugmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1882), pp. 405 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 409 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
A. und A. Schott, <hi rend='italic'>Walachische Maerchen</hi>
(Stuttgart and Tübingen), No. 10,
p. 142; Chr. Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und
Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck,
1867), No. 39, pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Basile,
<hi rend='italic'>Pentamerone</hi>, übertragen von F. Liebrecht
(Breslau, 1846), i. 99; P. Sébillot,
<hi rend='italic'>Contes Populaires de la Haute-Bretagne</hi>
(Paris, 1885), No. 11, p. 80; E.
Cosquin, <hi rend='italic'>Contes Populaires de Lorraine</hi>
(Paris, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), i. p. 61; J. Haltrich,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande
in Siebenbürgen</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Vienna and
Hermannstadt, 1885), No. 24, pp. 104
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Household Tales</hi>, No. 60.
The incident often occurs in the type
of tale analysed by Mr. E. S. Hartland
in his <hi rend='italic'>Legend of Perseus</hi> (vol. i. pp. 12,
17, 18, etc.; vol. iii. pp. 6, 7, 8, etc.).</note> On the other hand, the
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
tongues of certain animals, as the otter and the eagle, are
torn out and sometimes worn round their necks by Thlinkeet
and Haida shamans as a means of conferring superhuman
knowledge and power on their possessors.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, in <hi rend='italic'>Fifth Report on the
North-Western Tribes of Canada</hi>, p.
58 (separate reprint from the <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1889</hi>); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of American Folk-lore</hi>, i.
(1888) p. 218.</note> In particular, an
otter's tongue is supposed to convey a knowledge of <q>the
language of all inanimate objects, of birds, animals, and other
living creatures</q> to the shaman, who wears it in a little bag
hung round his neck.<note place='foot'>See W. H. Dall, <q>Masks and
Labrets,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington,
1884), pp. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska
and its Resources</hi> (London, 1870), p.
425; Ivan Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the
Population, Industries, and Resources
of Alaska</hi>, p. 176.</note> When a Galla priest sacrifices an
animal and decides that the omens are favourable, he cuts
out the tongue, sticks his thumb through it, and so flays the
animal.<note place='foot'>Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie
Nordost-Afrikas: die Geistige Cultur
der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi> (Berlin,
1896), p. 47.</note> In certain cases Gallas cut out the tongues of oxen
and wear them on their heads as tokens.<note place='foot'>Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 156;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die
materielle Cultur</hi>, etc. (Berlin, 1893),
p. 226.</note> In Bohemia a fox's
tongue is worn as an amulet to make a timid person bold;<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 54, § 354.</note>
in Oldenburg and Belgium it is a remedy for erysipelas.<note place='foot'>L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>
(Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 94, § 381;
E. Monseur, in <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des
Religions</hi>, xxxi. (1895) pp. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
Bohemia the tongue of a male snake, if cut from the living
animal on St. George's Eve and placed under a person's
tongue, will confer the gift of eloquence.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 81,
§ 576.</note> The Homeric
Greeks cut out the tongues of sacrificial victims and burned
them.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> iii. 332, 341.</note> According to some accounts, the tongues of the
victims were assigned by the Greeks to Hermes, as the
god of speech, or to his human representatives the heralds.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Plutus</hi>,
1110; Athenaeus, i. 28, p. 16 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Paroemiographi Graeci</hi>, ed. Leutsch et
Schneidewin, i. 415, No. 100.</note>
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
On the principles of sympathetic magic we might expect
that heralds should taste the tongues of sacrificial victims
to strengthen their voices, or to acquire the gift of
tongues.<note place='foot'>See further H. Gaidoz, <q>Les Langues
coupées,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, iii. (1886-87)
coll. 303-307; E. Monseur, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bechuana
custom of
mutilating
a sacrificial
ox in order
to inflict
corresponding
mutilations
on the
enemy.
Mutilation
of the
corpses
of enemies
or other
dangerous
persons for
the purpose
of maiming
their
ghosts. Disabling
the ghost
by mutilating
his
dead body.</note>
The conjecture that the practice of cutting out the tongues
of dead animals may sometimes be a precaution to prevent
their ghosts from telling tales, is to some extent confirmed
by a ceremony which the Bechuanas used to observe after a
battle. It was customary with them on these occasions to
sacrifice a fine black ox, called the expiatory victim (<foreign rend='italic'>pekou</foreign>),
cut off the tip of its tongue, and extract one of its eyes
together with a piece of the hamstring and a piece of the
principal tendon of the shoulder; and the severed parts were
afterwards carefully fried, along with some medicinal herbs,
in a horn by a medicine-man. The reasons for thus mutilating
the animal were explained by a native to two French
missionaries. <q>If we cut out and purify the victim's tongue,</q>
said he, <q>the motive is to induce the guardian deities to
prevent the enemy from speaking ill of us. We ask also
that the sinews of their feet and hands may fail them in the
battle; and that their eyes may not cast a covetous look on
our herds.</q><note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Relation
d'un Voyage d'Exploration au
Nord-est de la Colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi>
(Paris, 1842), pp. 562-564.</note> In this custom the sacrificial ox appears to be
treated as the ceremonial equivalent of the enemy; accordingly
by cutting out its tongue you obviously prevent your
enemy from cursing you, for how can he curse you if he has
no tongue? Similarly, by hamstringing the beast you ensure
that the legs and arms of your adversary will fail him in the
battle, and by gouging out the ox's eye you make perfectly
certain that the foe will never be able to cast a longing eye
on your fat beeves. Thus for all practical purposes the
mutilation of the ox is quite as effective as the mutilation of
the enemy's dead, which is sometimes practised by savages
from similar superstitious motives. Thus on the return from
a field of battle the Baganda used to cut up one or two of
the enemy's dead, scoop out the eyes, cut off the ears, and
lay the limbs on the road taken by the returning army <q>to
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
prevent evil following them.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes
on the Manners and Customs of the
Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902) p. 60.
This custom appears not to be mentioned
by the writer in his book <hi rend='italic'>The
Baganda</hi> (London, 1911).</note> The nature of the evil which
the Baganda warriors feared to incur if they did not mutilate
the dead in this fashion, is not mentioned, but we may conjecture
that by gouging out the eyes and ears of their
slain foes they hoped to make their angry ghosts blind
and deaf; or perhaps, upon the principles of homoeopathic
magic, they counted on maiming their living foes in like
manner. Some of the aborigines of Australia cut off the
thumbs of their dead enemies in order that their ghosts may
not be able to throw spears.<note place='foot'>A. Oldfield, <q>On the Aborigines
of Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, N.S.
iii. (1865) p. 287.</note> Other Australian tribes burn
off the thumb nails of their own dead to prevent the poor
ghost from scratching a way for himself out of the grave.<note place='foot'>E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>
(Melbourne and London, 1886), i. 348,
381.</note>
When the Tupi Indians of Brazil killed and ate a prisoner,
<q>the thumb was cut off because of its use in archery, an art
concerning which they were singularly superstitious; what
was done with it does not appear, except that it was not
eaten like the rest.</q><note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>,
vol. i. Second Edition (London, 1822),
p. 231.</note> Perhaps these Indians, like the
Australians, thought by this mutilation to disarm the
dangerous ghost of their victim. When any bad man died,
the Esquimaux of Bering Strait used to cut the sinews of
his arms and legs, <q>in order to prevent the shade from
returning to the body and causing it to walk at night as a
ghoul.</q><note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo
about Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi>, part i. (Washington, 1899)
p. 423.</note> In Travancore the ghosts of men who have been
hanged for murder are particularly dreaded; so in order to
incapacitate them from roaming about and attacking people,
it used to be customary to slice off a criminal's heels with a
sword or hamstring him at the moment when he swung free
from the ladder.<note place='foot'>Rev. S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>The Land of
Charity</hi> (London, 1871), pp. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Omaha Indians used to slit the soles
of a man who had been killed by lightning in order to
prevent his ghost from walking.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, <q>A Study
of Siouan Cults,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1894), p. 420.</note> Among the Awemba of
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
Northern Rhodesia murderers often inflicted shocking mutilations
on the bodies of their victims. <q>This was done, it is
said, to prevent the spirit of the murdered person from
exacting vengeance, and even if only the joint of the first or
the little finger were cut off, such mutilation would suffice
for this purpose.</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, <hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 126.</note> These examples suggest that many other
mutilations which savages practise on their dead enemies
may spring, not from the blind fury of hatred, but from
a cool calculation of the best mode of protecting themselves
against the very natural resentment of the ghosts;
by mutilating the corpse they apparently hope to maim the
ghost and so to render him incapable of harming them.
At all events it appears that in certain circumstances some
savages treat the dead bodies of men and beasts much alike,
by hamstringing them in order to prevent their ghosts from
getting up and walking. So consistent and impartial is the
primitive philosopher in his attitude to the spirit world.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XV. The Propitiation of Vermin by Farmers.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Enemies of the Crops.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Enemies of the Crops.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Propitiation
of the
vermin
which infest
crops and
cattle in
Europe.</note>
Besides the animals which primitive man dreads for their
strength and ferocity, and those which he reveres on account
of the benefits which he expects from them, there is another
class of creatures which he sometimes deems it necessary to
conciliate by worship and sacrifice. These are the vermin
that infest his crops and his cattle. To rid himself of these
deadly foes the farmer has recourse to many superstitious
devices, of which, though some are meant to destroy
or intimidate the vermin, others aim at propitiating them
and persuading them by fair means to spare the fruits of
the earth and the herds. Thus Esthonian peasants, in the
island of Oesel, stand in great awe of the weevil, an insect
which is exceedingly destructive to the grain. They give it
a fine name, and if a child is about to kill a weevil they say,
<q>Don't do it; the more we hurt him, the more he hurts us.</q>
If they find a weevil they bury it in the earth instead of
killing it. Some even put the weevil under a stone in the
field and offer corn to it. They think that thus it is appeased
and does less harm.<note place='foot'>J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. Heft
2 (Dorpat, 1872), p. 105 note.</note> Amongst the Saxons of Transylvania,
in order to keep sparrows from the corn, the sower begins by
throwing the first handful of seed backwards over his head,
saying, <q>That is for you, sparrows.</q> To guard the corn
against the attacks of leaf-flies (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Erdflöhe</foreign>) he shuts his eyes
and scatters three handfuls of oats in different directions.
Having made this offering to the leaf-flies he feels sure that
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
they will spare the corn. A Transylvanian way of securing
the crops against all birds, beasts, and insects, is this: after
he has finished sowing, the sower goes once more from end
to end of the field imitating the gesture of sowing, but with
an empty hand. As he does so he says, <q>I sow this for the
animals; I sow it for everything that flies and creeps, that
walks and stands, that sings and springs, in the name of
God the Father, etc.</q><note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt, 1880),
pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Huzuls of the Carpathians
believe that the bite of the weasel is poisonous and that the
animal commits ravages on the cattle. Yet they take care
never to kill a weasel, lest the surviving kinsfolk of the
deceased should avenge his death on the herds of his
murderer. They even celebrate a festival of weasels either
on St. Matthew's day (9th August, old style, 21st August,
new style), or on St. Catherine's day (24th November, old
style, 6th December, new style). On that day no work
may be done, lest the weasels should harm the herds.<note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi>
(Vienna, 1894), pp. 79, 103; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Viehzucht und Viehzauber in den
Ostkarpaten,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxix. (1906) p.
387.</note> The
following is a German way of freeing a garden from caterpillars.
After sunset or at midnight the mistress of the
house, or another female member of the family, walks all
round the garden dragging a broom after her. She must
not look behind her, and must keep murmuring, <q>Good
evening, Mother Caterpillar, you shall come with your
husband to church.</q> The garden gate is left open till
the following morning.<note place='foot'>E. Krause, <q>Abergläubische Kuren
und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>, xv. (1883)
p. 93.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
attempts
made to
propitiate
vermin by
savages.</note>
The attempts thus made by European peasants to
mollify the rage and avert the ravages of vermin have their
counterpart in the similar observances of savages. When
the Matabele find caterpillars in their fields they put an ear of
corn in a calabash, fill the vessel up with caterpillars, and set it
down on a path leading to another village, hoping thus to
induce the insects to migrate thither.<note place='foot'>L. Decle, <hi rend='italic'>Three Years in Savage
Africa</hi> (London, 1898), p. 160.</note> The Yabim of German
New Guinea imagine that the caterpillars and worms which
infest their fields of taro are animated by the souls of
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
the human dead; hence in order to rid the crops of these
vermin they politely request the insects to leave the fields
and repair to the village. <q>Ye locusts, worms, and caterpillars,</q>
they say, <q>who have died or hanged yourselves,
or have been killed by a falling log or devoured by a shark,
go into the village.</q><note place='foot'>Vetter, <q>Aberglaube unter dem
Jabim-Stamme in Kaiser-Wilhelmsland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen der Geographischen
Gesellschaft zu Jena</hi>, xii. (1893) pp.
95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> There is a certain ant whose destructive
ravages are dreaded by the people of Nias.
Generally they wage war on it by means of traps and other
devices; but at the time of the rice-harvest they cease to
call the insect by its common name, and refer to it under the
title of Sibaia, a good spirit who is supposed to protect the
crop from harm.<note place='foot'>E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi>
(Milan, 1890), p. 626.</note> In South Mirzapur, when locusts threaten
to eat up the fruits of the earth, the people catch one,
decorate his head with a spot of red lead, salaam to him,
and let him go. After these civilities he immediately
departs along with his fellows.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folklore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), ii. 303.</note> Among the Wajagga of
German East Africa sorcerers attempt to rid the fields
of locusts by catching one of the insects, tying its legs
together, and letting it fly away, after charging the creature
to lead the swarm to the lands of a neighbouring and hostile
chief.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <q>Rechtsverhältnisse
und Sitten der Wadschagga,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen, Ergänzungsheft</hi>
No. 113 (Gotha, 1902), pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Wagogo, another tribe of German East Africa,
catch one of the birds which infest their gardens, and, having
drenched it with a charmed stuff, they release the bird in
the hope that it may entice all its companions away into
the forest.<note place='foot'>Rev. H. Cole, <q>Notes on the
Wagogo of German East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 320.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
in dealing
with vermin
the farmer
aims at a
judicious
mean
between
undue
severity
and weak
indulgence.</note>
Sometimes in dealing with vermin the farmer aims at
hitting a happy mean between excessive rigour on the one
hand and weak indulgence on the other; kind but firm, he
tempers severity with mercy. An ancient Greek treatise on
farming advises the husbandman who would rid his lands of
mice to act thus: <q>Take a sheet of paper and write on it as
follows: <q>I adjure you, ye mice here present, that ye neither
injure me nor suffer another mouse to do so. I give you
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
yonder field</q> (here you specify the field); <q>but if ever I
catch you here again, by the Mother of the Gods I will rend
you in seven pieces.</q> Write this, and stick the paper on an
unhewn stone in the field before sunrise, taking care to keep
the written side up.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xiii. 5. According to
the commentator, the field assigned to
the mice is a neighbour's, but it may
be a patch of waste ground on the
farmer's own land. The charm is said
to have been employed formerly in the
neighbourhood of Paris (A. de Nore,
<hi rend='italic'>Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des
Provinces de France</hi>, Paris and Lyons,
1846, p. 383).</note> In the Ardennes they say that to
get rid of rats you should repeat the following words: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Erat
verbum, apud Deum vestrum.</foreign> Male rats and female rats, I
conjure you, by the great God, to go out of my house, out of
all my habitations, and to betake yourselves to such and such
a place, there to end your days. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Decretis, reversis et desembarassis
virgo potens, clemens, justitiae.</foreign></q> Then write the
same words on pieces of paper, fold them up, and place one
of them under the door by which the rats are to go forth,
and the other on the road which they are to take. This
exorcism should be performed at sunrise.<note place='foot'>A. Meyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions, Coutumes,
Légendes et Contes des Ardennes</hi>
(Charleville, 1890), p. 176.</note> Some years ago
an American farmer was reported to have written a civil
letter to the rats, telling them that his crops were short, that
he could not afford to keep them through the winter, that he
had been very kind to them, and that for their own good he
thought they had better leave him and go to some of his
neighbours who had more grain. This document he pinned
to a post in his barn for the rats to read.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>American Journal of Folk-lore</hi>, xi.
(1898) p. 161.</note> The mouse
is one of the most dreaded enemies of the rice-crop in
Celebes. Many therefore are the prayers and incantations
which prudent farmers resort to for the purpose of keeping
the vermin from their fields. Thus, for example, a man
will run round his field, saying, <q>Pruner is your name.
Creep not through my rice. Be blind and deaf. Creep
not through my rice. If you must creep through rice,
go and creep through other rice.</q> The following formula is
equally effective: <q>Pruner is your real name. Mouse is
your by-name. Down in the evening land is the stone
on which you ought to sit; in the west, in Java, is your
abode.</q> Or again: <q>O Longtail, Longtail, eat not my
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
rice. It is the rice of a prince. It is the field of one who
is revered.</q><note place='foot'>G. Maan, <q>Eenige mededeelingen
omtrent de zeden en gewoonten der
Toerateya ten opzichte van den rijstbouw,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlvi. (1903)
pp. 329 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Aino of Japan believe that God first
created rats and mice at Erum kotan, which means <q>rat
place.</q> Indeed, there are a great many rats and mice
there even now, and the people of the village worship mice
and offer them libations and sacred sticks whittled at the
top into shavings. Grateful for these attentions, the mice
spare the gardens and will not nibble at the roots and the
fruits. But if the people omit to worship the mice, or if
they are rash enough to speak evil of them, the creatures
are angry and eat up the garden produce. The havoc which
rats and mice now work in the gardens of the Aino every
year is attributed to the modern neglect of the people to
worship the vermin.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Batchelor, <hi rend='italic'>The Ainu and
their Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1901), p.
509.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sometimes
a few of the
vermin are
treated
with high
distinction,
while the
rest are
pursued
with
relentless
rigour. Mock
lamentations
of
women for
insects
which
destroy
the crops.</note>
Sometimes the desired object is supposed to be attained
by treating with high distinction one or two chosen individuals
of the obnoxious species, while the rest are pursued with
relentless rigour. In the East Indian island of Bali, the
mice which ravage the rice-fields are caught in great numbers,
and burned in the same way that corpses are burned. But
two of the captured mice are allowed to live, and receive a
little packet of white linen. Then the people bow down
before them, as before gods, and let them go.<note place='foot'>R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het
eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
N.S., viii. (1879) p. 125.</note> In the
Kangean archipelago, East Indies, when the mice prove
very destructful to the rice-crop, the people rid themselves
of the pest in the following manner. On a Friday, when
the usual service in the mosque is over, four pairs of mice
are solemnly united in marriage by the priest. Each pair is
then shut up in a miniature canoe about a foot long. These
canoes are filled with rice and other fruits of the earth, and
the four pairs of mice are then escorted to the sea-shore
just as if it were a real wedding. Wherever the procession
passes the people beat with all their might on their rice-blocks.
On reaching the shore, the canoes, with their little
inmates, are launched and left to the mercy of the winds and
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
waves.<note place='foot'>J. L. van Gennep, <q>Bijdrage tot
de kennis van den Kangean-Archipel,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, xlvi.
(1896) p. 101.</note> When the farms of the Sea Dyaks or Ibans of Sarawak
are much pestered by birds and insects, they catch a specimen
of each kind of vermin (one sparrow, one grasshopper
and so on), put them in a tiny boat of bark well-stocked with
provisions, and then allow the little vessel with its obnoxious
passengers to float down the river. If that does not drive
the pests away, the Dyaks resort to what they deem a
more effectual mode of accomplishing the same purpose.
They make a clay crocodile as large as life and set it up in
the fields, where they offer it food, rice-spirit, and cloth, and
sacrifice a fowl and a pig before it. Mollified by these
attentions, the ferocious animal very soon gobbles up all the
creatures that devour the crops.<note place='foot'>C. Hose and W. McDougall,
<q>The Relations between Men and
Animals in Sarawak</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901)
pp. 198 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts of Bohemia
the peasant, though he kills field mice and grey mice without
scruple, always spares white mice. If he finds a white mouse
he takes it up carefully, and makes a comfortable bed for it
in the window; for if it died the luck of the house would be
gone, and the grey mice would multiply fearfully in the
dwelling.<note place='foot'>J. V. Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 60,
§ 405.</note> In Albania, if the fields or vineyards are ravaged
by locusts or beetles, some of the women will assemble with
dishevelled hair, catch a few of the insects, and march with
them in a funeral procession to a spring or stream, in which
they drown the creatures. Then one of the women sings,
<q>O locusts and beetles who have left us bereaved,</q> and the
dirge is taken up and repeated by all the women in chorus.
Thus by celebrating the obsequies of a few locusts and
beetles, they hope to bring about the death of them all.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische
Studien</hi> (Jena, 1854), Heft i. p. 157.</note>
When caterpillars invaded a vineyard or field in Syria, the
virgins were gathered, and one of the caterpillars was taken
and a girl made its mother. Then they bewailed and buried
it. Thereafter they conducted the <q>mother</q> to the place
where the caterpillars were, consoling her, in order that all
the caterpillars might leave the garden.<note place='foot'>Lagarde, <hi rend='italic'>Reliquiae juris ecclesiastici
antiquissimae</hi>, p. 135. For this passage
I am indebted to my late friend W.
Robertson Smith, who kindly translated
it for me from the Syriac. It occurs in
the Canons of Jacob of Edessa, of which
a German translation has been published
by C. Kayser (<hi rend='italic'>Die Canones Jacob's von
Edessa übersetzt und erläutert</hi>, Leipsic,
1886; see pp. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> On the first of
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
September, Russian girls <q>make small coffins of turnips and
other vegetables, enclose flies and other insects in them, and
then bury them with a great show of mourning.</q><note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi> (London, 1872), p.
255.</note> In
South Africa a plague of caterpillars is removed by a
number of small Caffre girls, who go singing through the
fields. They wail as they pass through the languishing
crops, and thus invoke the aid and pity of some ancestral
spirits. The mournful rite ends with a dance on a plot of
ground overlooking the fields.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood, a
Study of Kafir Children</hi> (London,
1906), p. 292.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremony
performed
by Baronga
women
to drive
insects
from the
crops.</note>
On the shore of Delagoa Bay there thrives a small brown
beetle which is very destructive to the beans and maize.
The Baronga call it <foreign rend='italic'>noonoo</foreign>. In December or January,
when the insects begin to swarm, women are sent to collect
them from the bean-stalks in shells. When they have done
so, a twin girl is charged with the duty of throwing the
insects into a neighbouring lake. Accompanied by a woman
of mature years and carrying the beetles in a calabash, the
girl goes on her mission without saying a word to any one.
At her back marches the whole troop of women, their arms,
waists, and heads covered with grass and holding in their
hands branches of manioc with large leaves which they wave
to and fro, while they chant the words, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Noonoo</foreign>, go away!
Leave our fields! <foreign rend='italic'>Noonoo</foreign>, go away! leave our fields!</q>
The little girl throws her calabash with the beetles into the
water without looking behind her, and thereupon the women
bellow out obscene songs, which they never dare to utter
except on this occasion and at the ceremony for making
rain.<note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>Les Ba-ronga</hi> (Neuchatel,
1898), pp. 419 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the
rain-making ceremony among the Baronga,
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Images
made of
vermin as
a charm to
get rid of
them.</note>
Another mode of getting rid of vermin and other noxious
creatures without hurting their feelings or shewing them
disrespect is to make images of them. Apollonius of Tyana
is said to have cleared Antioch of scorpions by making a
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
bronze image of a scorpion and burying it under a small
pillar in the middle of the city.<note place='foot'>J. Malalas, <hi rend='italic'>Chronographia</hi>, ed.
L. Dindorf (Bonn, 1831), p. 264.</note> Further, it is reported that
he freed Constantinople from flies by means of a bronze fly,
and from gnats by means of a bronze gnat.<note place='foot'>D. Comparetti, <hi rend='italic'>Vergil in the Middle
Ages</hi> (London, 1895), p. 265. I have to
thank Mr. J. D. May of Merton College,
Oxford, for this and the following
references to Comparetti's book.</note> In the Middle
Ages Virgil passed for an enchanter and is said to have rid
Naples of flies and grasshoppers by bronze or copper images
of these insects; and when the waters of the city were
infested by leeches, he made a golden leech, which put a
stop to the plague.<note place='foot'>D. Comparetti, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 259,
293, 341.</note> It is reported that a mosque at Fez
used to be protected against scorpions by an image of a bird
holding a scorpion in its beak.<note place='foot'>E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Magie et Religion dans
l'Afrique du Nord</hi> (Algiers, 1908), p.
144.</note> An Arab writer tells of
a golden locust which guarded a certain town from a plague
of locusts; and he also mentions two brazen oxen which
checked a murrain among cattle.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, iv. (London,
1903) col. 4395.</note> Gregory of Tours tells us
that the city of Paris used to be free of dormice and serpents,
but that in his lifetime, while they were cleaning a sewer,
they found a bronze serpent and a bronze dormouse and
removed them. <q>Since then,</q> adds the good bishop, <q>dormice
and serpents without number have been seen in Paris.</q><note place='foot'>Grégoire de Tours, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
Ecclésiastique des Francs</hi>, traduction de
M. Guizot, Nouvelle Édition (Paris,
1874), viii. 33, vol. i. p. 514. For
some stories of the same sort, see J. B.
Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des Superstitions</hi> (Paris,
1679), pp. 306-308.</note>
When their land was overrun with mice, the Philistines made
golden images of the vermin and sent them out of the
country in a new cart drawn by two cows, hoping that the
real mice would simultaneously depart.<note place='foot'>1 Samuel vi. 4-18. The passage
in which the plague of mice is definitely
described has been omitted in the
existing Hebrew text, but is preserved
in the Septuagint (1 Samuel v. 6, καὶ
μέσον τῆς χώρας αὐτῆς ἀνεφύησαν μύες).
See Dean Kirkpatrick's note on 1
Samuel v. 6 (<hi rend='italic'>Cambridge Bible for
Schools and Colleges</hi>).</note> So when a swarm
of serpents afflicted the Israelites in the desert, they made a
serpent of brass and set it on a pole as a mode of staying
the plague.<note place='foot'>Numbers xxi. 6-9.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Mouse Apollo and Wolf Apollo.'/>
<head>§ 2. Mouse Apollo and Wolf Apollo.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Greek gods
who took
titles from
vermin.
Mouse
(Smintheus)
Apollo.</note>
Some of the Greek gods were worshipped under titles
derived from the vermin or other pests which they were
supposed to avert or exterminate. Thus we hear of Mouse
Apollo,<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, i. 39, with the
Scholia and the comment of Eustathius;
Strabo, xiii. 1. 48 and 63; Aelian,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> xii. 5; Clement of
Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 39, p. 34,
ed. Potter; Pausanias, x. 12. 5.</note> Locust Apollo,<note place='foot'>Strabo, xiii. 1. 64; Pausanias, i.
24. 8.</note> and Mildew Apollo;<note place='foot'>Strabo, xiii. 1. 64; Eustathius, on
Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, i. 39, p. 34; Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
No. 609 (vol. ii. p. 386).</note> of Locust
Hercules and Worm-killing Hercules;<note place='foot'>Strabo and Eustathius, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> of Foxy Dionysus;<note place='foot'>Professor W. Ridgeway has pointed
out that the epithet Bassareus applied
to Dionysus (Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae
Graecae Compendium</hi>, 30) appears to
be derived from bassara, <q>a fox.</q> See
J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. on Lycophron</hi>, 771;
W. Ridgeway, in <hi rend='italic'>The Classical Review</hi>,
x. (1896) pp. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; S. Reinach,
<hi rend='italic'>Cultes, Mythes, et Religions</hi>, ii. (Paris,
1906) pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
and of Zeus the Fly-catcher or Averter of Flies.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> x. 75;
Pausanias, v. 14. 1, viii. 26. 7;
Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii.
38, p. 33, ed. Potter.</note> If we
could trace all these and similar worships to their origin,
we should probably find that they were at first addressed, not
to the high gods as the protectors of mankind, but to the
baleful things themselves, the mice, locusts, mildew, and so
forth, with the intention of flattering and soothing them, of
disarming their malignity, and of persuading them to spare
their worshippers. We know that the Romans worshipped the
mildew, the farmer's plague, under its own proper name.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Robigo</foreign> or personified as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Robigus</foreign>.
See Varro, <hi rend='italic'>Rerum rusticarum</hi>, i. 1. 6;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua latina</hi>, vi. 16; Ovid,
<hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 905 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>De
spectaculis</hi>, 5; Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate
Dei</hi>, iv. 21; Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Divin. Instit.</hi>
i. 20; L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1881-1883), ii. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
W. Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Festivals
of the Period of the Republic</hi>
(London, 1899), pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The ravages committed by mice among the crops both in
ancient and modern times are notorious,<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Anim.</hi> vi. 37, p.
580 b 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi>
xvii. 41; W. Warde Fowler, in <hi rend='italic'>The
Classical Review</hi> vi. (1892) p. 413.
In Laos, a province of Siam, the
ravages committed by rats are terrible.
From time to time whole armies of
these destructive rodents appear and
march across the country in dense
columns and serried ranks, devouring
everything as they go, and leaving
famine, with all its horrors, in their
train. See Lieut.-Col. Tournier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice
sur le Laos Français</hi> (Hanoi, 1900),
pp. 104, 135. So in Burma, the
rats multiply in some years to such
an extent that they cause a famine by
destroying whole crops and granaries.
See Max and Bertha Ferrars, <hi rend='italic'>Burma</hi>
(London, 1900), pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and according to
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
a tradition which may be substantially correct the worship of
the Mouse (Smintheus) Apollo was instituted to avert them.<note place='foot'>Polemo, cited by a scholiast on
Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, i. 39 (ed. Im. Bekker).
Compare Eustathius on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>,
i. 39.</note>
The image of a mouse which stood beside Apollo's tripod in the
god's temple in the Troad,<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi> xii. 5.</note> may be compared with the golden
mice which the Philistines made for the purpose of ridding
themselves of the vermin; and the tame mice kept in his
sanctuary, together with the white mice which lived under the
altar,<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> would on this hypothesis be parallel to the white mice
which the Bohemian peasant still cherishes as the best way
of keeping down the numbers of their grey-coated brethren.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</note>
An Oriental counterpart of the Mouse Apollo is the ancient
pillar or rude idol which the Chams of Indo-China call
<foreign rend='italic'>yang-tikuh</foreign> or <q>god rat,</q> and to which they offer sacrifices
whenever rats infest their fields in excessive numbers.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <q>Les Tchames et
leurs religions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des
Religions</hi>, xxiv. (1891) p. 236.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Wolfish
Apollo.</note>
Another epithet applied to Apollo which probably admits
of a similar explanation is Wolfish.<note place='foot'>Λύκειος or Λύκιος, Pausanias, i.
19. 3 (with my note), ii. 9. 7, ii. 19. 3,
viii. 40. 5; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Anacharsis</hi>, 7;
Im. Bekker, <hi rend='italic'>Anecdota Graeca</hi> (Berlin,
1814-1821), i. 277, lines 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Various legends set
forth how the god received the title of Wolfish because he
exterminated wolves;<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 9. 7; Scholiast on
Demosthenes, xxiv. 114, p. 736.</note> indeed this function was definitely
attributed to him by the epithet Wolf-slayer.<note place='foot'>Sophocles, <hi rend='italic'>Electra</hi>, 6.</note> Arguing
from the analogy of the preceding cases, we may suppose that
at first the wolves themselves were propitiated by fair words
and sacrifices to induce them to spare man and beast; and that
at a later time, when the Greeks, or rather the enlightened
portion of them, had outgrown this rude form of worship, they
transferred the duty of keeping off the wolves to a beneficent
deity who discharged the same useful office for other pests,
such as mice, locusts, and mildew. A reminiscence of the
direct propitiation of the fierce and dangerous beasts themselves
is preserved in the legends told to explain the origin
of the Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens and of the
sanctuary of Wolfish Apollo at Sicyon. It is said that
once, when Athens was infested by wolves, Apollo commanded
sacrifices to be offered on the Place of Wolves and the smell
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
proved fatal to the animals.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Demosthenes, xxiv.
114, p. 736.</note> Similarly at Sicyon, when the
flocks suffered heavily from the ravages of wolves, the same
god directed the shepherds to set forth meat mixed with
a certain bark, and the wolves devoured the tainted meat
and perished.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 9. 7.</note> These legends probably reflect in a distorted
form an old custom of sacrificing to the wolves, in other
words of feeding them to mollify their ferocity and win their
favour. We know that such a custom prevailed among the
Letts down to comparatively recent times. In the month of
December, about Christmas time, they sacrificed a goat to
the wolves, with strange idolatrous rites, at a cross-road, for
the purpose of inducing the wolves to spare the flocks and
herds. After offering the sacrifice they used to brag that
no beast of theirs would fall a victim to the ravening maw
of a wolf for all the rest of that year, no, not though the
pack were to run right through the herd. Sacrifices of this
sort are reported to have been secretly offered by the Letts
as late as the seventeenth century;<note place='foot'>P. Einhorn, <hi rend='italic'>Reformatio gentis
Letticae in Ducatu Curlandiae</hi>, reprinted
in <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</hi>,
vol. ii. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848)
p. 621. The preface of Einhorn's work
is dated 17th July 1636.</note> and if we knew more of
peasant life in ancient Greece we might find that on winter
days, while Aristotle was expounding his philosophy in the
Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens, the Attic peasant
was still carrying forth, in the crisp frosty air, his offering to
the wolves, which all night long had been howling round his
sheepfold in a snowy glen of Parnes or Pentelicus.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVI. The Transmigration of Human Souls Into Animals.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Many
savages
spare
certain
animals
because
they believe
the souls of
their dead
to be
lodged
in them.
Examples
of this
belief
among the
American
Indians.</note>
With many savages a reason for respecting and sparing
certain species of animals is a belief that the souls of their dead
kinsfolk are lodged in these creatures. Thus the Indians of
Cayenne refuse to eat certain large fish, because they say
that the soul of some one of their relations might be in the
fish, and that hence in eating the fish they might swallow
the soul.<note place='foot'>A. Biet, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage de la France
Equinoxiale en l'Isle de Cayenne</hi> (Paris,
1664), p. 361.</note> The Piaroas Indians of the Orinoco believe that
the tapir is their ancestor and that the souls of the dying
transmigrate into animals of that species. Hence they will
never hunt the tapir nor eat its flesh. It may even ravage
their crops with impunity; they will not attempt to ward it
off or scare it away.<note place='foot'>J. Chaffanjon, <hi rend='italic'>L'Orénoque et le
Caura</hi> (Paris, 1889), p. 203.</note> The Canelos Indians of Ecuador also
believe in the transmigration of souls; it is especially under
the form of jaguars that they expect to be born again; hence
they refuse to attack a jaguar except by way of righteous
retribution for some wrong he has done them.<note place='foot'>Levrault, <q>Rapport sur les
provinces de Canélos et du Napo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris), Deuxième Série, xi. (1839)
p. 75.</note> The doctrine
of transmigration finds favour also with the Quixos Indians;
an old man told the Italian traveller Osculati that the soul
is a breath which passes from the human body into an
animal, and on the death of the animal shifts its quarters to
another body.<note place='foot'>G. Osculati, <hi rend='italic'>Esplorazione delle
regioni equatorali lungo il Napo ed il
fiume delle Amazzoni</hi> (Milan, 1850),
p. 114.</note> The Caingua Indians of Paraguay think that
the souls of the dead which are unable to depart this earth are
born again in the shape of animals; for that reason many of
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
them refuse to eat the flesh of the domestic pig, because they
say, <q>He was a man.</q><note place='foot'>J. B. Ambrosetti, <q>Los Indios
Caingua del alto Paraná (misiones),</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Boletin del Instituto Geografico Argentino</hi>,
xv. (Buenos Ayres, 1895) p. 740.</note> Once when a Spaniard was out hunting
with two Piros Indians of Peru, they passed a deserted house
in which they saw a fine jaguar. The Indians drew the
Spaniard away, and when he asked why they did not attack
the animal, they said: <q>It was our sister. She died at the
last rains. We abandoned the hut and on the second night
she came back. It was the beautiful jaguar.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Wiener, <hi rend='italic'>Pérou et Bolivie</hi>
(Paris, 1880), p. 369.</note> Similarly
a missionary remarked of the Chiriguanos Indians of Bolivia
that they must have some idea of the transmigration of souls;
for one day, while he was talking with a woman of the tribe
who had left her daughter in a neighbouring village, she
started at sight of a fox passing near and exclaimed, <q>May
it not be the soul of my daughter who has died?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</hi>,
Nouvelle Édition, viii. (Paris, 1781)
pp. 335 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The
Colombian Indians in the district of Popayan will not kill
the deer of their forests, and entertain such a respect for
these animals that they view with horror and indignation
any one who dares to eat venison in their presence. They
say that the souls of persons who have led a good life are in
the deer.<note place='foot'>Fr. Coreal, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages aux Indes
occidentales</hi> (Amsterdam, 1722), ii. 132.</note> In like manner the Indians of California formerly
refused to eat the flesh of large game, because they held
that the bodies of all large animals contained the souls of
past generations of men and women. However, the Indians
who were maintained at the Spanish missions and received
their rations in the form of beef, had to overcome their
conscientious scruples in regard to cattle. Once a half-caste,
wishing to amuse himself at the expense of the devout,
cooked a dish of bear's flesh for them and told them it was
beef. They ate heartily of it, but when they learned the
trick that had been played on them, they were seized with
retchings, which only ended with the reappearance of the
obnoxious meat. A reproach hurled by the wild tribes at their
brethren who had fallen under European influence was <q>They
eat venison!</q><note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi> (Philadelphia,
1853-1856), v. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Californian Indians have been known to plead
for the life of an old grizzly she-bear, because they thought
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
it housed the soul of a dead grandam, whose withered features
had borne some likeness to the wrinkled face of the bear.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 113.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals in
Africa.</note>
The doctrine of the transmigration of human souls
into animal bodies is viewed with great favour by
the negroes of northern Guinea. In different parts of the
coast different species of animals are accounted sacred,
because they are supposed to be animated by the spirits
of the dead. Hence monkeys near Fishtown, snakes
at Whydah, and crocodiles near Dix Cove live in the odour
of sanctity.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>Western Africa</hi>
(London, 1856), p. 210.</note> In the lagoon of Tendo, on the Ivory Coast
of West Africa, there is a certain sacred islet covered with
impenetrable scrub, on which no native dare set foot. It is
peopled only by countless huge bats, which at evening quit
the island by hundreds of thousands to fly towards the River
Tanoe, which flows into the lagoon. The natives say that
these bats are the souls of the dead, who retire during the day
to the holy isle and are bound to present themselves every
night at the abode of Tano, the great and good fetish who
dwells by the river of his name. Paddling past the island
the negroes will not look at it, but turn away their heads. A
European in crossing the lagoon wished to shoot one of the
bats, but his boatmen implored him to refrain, lest he should
kill the soul of one of their kinsfolk.<note place='foot'>J. C. Reichenbach, <q>Étude sur le
royaume d'Assinie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la
Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), vii. Série,
xi. (1890) pp. 322 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Mopane country
of South Africa there is, or used to be, no check on the
increase of lions, because the natives, believing that the souls
of their chiefs entered into the animals, never attempted to kill
them; on the contrary, whenever they met a lion they saluted
him in the usual fashion by clapping their hands. Hence the
country was so infested by lions that people, benighted in
fields, often slept for safety in trees.<note place='foot'>D. Livingstone, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary Travels
and Researches in South Africa</hi>
(London, 1857), p. 615.</note> Similarly, the Makanga,
who occupy the angle between the Zambesi and Shire rivers,
refrain from killing lions because they believe that the spirits
of dead chiefs enter into them.<note place='foot'>Miss A. Werner, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of
British Central Africa</hi> (London, 1906),
p. 64.</note> The Amambwe universally
suppose that their reigning chief turns at death into a lion.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern
Rhodesia</hi> (London, 1911), p. 200.</note>
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
The Bahima of Ankole, in Central Africa, also imagine that
their dead kings are changed into lions. Their corpses are
carried to a forest called Ensanzi, where they lie in state for
several days. At the end of that time the body is supposed
to burst and give forth a lion cub, which contains the spirit
of the deceased king. The animal is nurtured by priests till
it is grown up, when it is released and allowed to roam the
forest with the other lions. It is the duty of the priests to
feed and care for the lions and to hold communications with
the dead kings when occasion arises. For that purpose the
priests always live in a temple in the forest, where they
receive frequent offerings of cattle for the lions. In this
forest the lions are sacred and may not be killed, but in
other parts of the country they may be slaughtered with
impunity. Similarly, the Bahima think that at death the
king's wives are changed into leopards; the transformation
takes place in like manner through the bursting of the dead
bodies in a belt of the same sacred forest. There the leopards
are daily fed with offerings of meat by priests, whose office
is hereditary. Further, the Bahima are of opinion that the
spirits of dead princes and princesses come to life again in
the form of snakes, which burst from their dead bodies in
another belt of the same forest: there is a temple in the
forest where priests feed and guard the holy serpents. When
the little snakes have issued from the corpses of the princes,
they are fed with milk till they are big enough to go alone.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>The Bahima,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxvii. (1907) pp. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare Major J. A. Meldon, <q>Notes
on the Bahima of Ankole,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the African Society</hi>, No. 22 (January,
1907), p. 151.</note>
The El Kiboron clan of the Masai, in East Africa, imagine
that when married men of the clan are buried, their bones
turn into serpents. Hence the El Kiboron do not, like the
other Masai, kill snakes: on the contrary they are glad to
see the reptiles in the kraal and set out saucers of milk and
honey for them on the ground. It is said that snakes never
bite members of the clan.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1894), p. 202. The belief that the
human dead are turned into serpents
is common in Africa; and
the practice of offering milk to the
reptiles appears to be not infrequent.
See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 71 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Ababu and other tribes of
the Congo region believe that at death their souls transmigrate
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
into the bodies of various animals, such as the
hippopotamus, the leopard, the gorilla, and the gazelle; and
on no account would a man eat the flesh of an animal of the
particular kind which he expects to inhabit in the next life.<note place='foot'>J. Halkin, <hi rend='italic'>Quelques Peuplades du
district de l'Uelé</hi> (Liége, 1907), p.
102; <hi rend='italic'>Notes Analytiques sur les Collections
Ethnographiques du Musée du
Congo, La Religion</hi> (Brussels, 1906),
p. 162.</note>
Some of the Caffres of the Zambesi region, in Portuguese
territory, who believe in the transmigration of human souls
into the bodies of animals, judge of the species of animals
into which a dead person has transmigrated by the resemblance
which he bore to it in his life. Thus, the soul of
a big burly man with prominent teeth will pass into an
elephant; a strong man with a long beard will become a
lion; an ugly man with a large mouth and thick lips will
be a hyaena; and so on. Animals supposed to be tenanted
by the spirits of the dead are treated as sacred and invulnerable.
When a Portuguese lady, named Dona Maria, to
whom the blacks were much attached, had departed this life,
it chanced that a hyaena came repeatedly by night to the
village and carried off pigs and kids. The lady's old slaves
would not do the creature the smallest hurt, saying, <q>It is
Dona Maria, our good mistress. She is hungry and comes
to her house seeking what she may devour.</q><note place='foot'>Father Courtois, <q>Scènes de la
vie Cafre,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>,
xv. (1883) p. 593. For more evidence
of similar beliefs in Africa, see Father
Courtois, <q>À travers le haut Zambèze,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>, xvi. (1884)
p. 299 (souls of the dead in guinea-fowl);
Father Lejeune, <q>Dans la
forêt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxvii.
(1895) p. 248 (souls of the dead in
apes, owls, etc.).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals in
Madagascar.</note>
The belief that the souls of the dead transmigrate into
the bodies of animals appears to be widely diffused among
the tribes of Madagascar. Thus, for example, the souls of
the Betsileo are thought after death to be reborn in boa-constrictors,
crocodiles, and eels of a particular sort according
to their rank in life. It is the nobles, or at all events the
most illustrious of them, who have the privilege of turning
into boa-constrictors at death. To facilitate the transformation
the corpse of a dead noble is strapped to the central
pillar of his house, and the products of decomposition are
collected in a silver bowl. The largest of the worms which
are bred in the putrid liquid is believed to contain the soul
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
of the dead nobleman and to develop in due time into a boa-constrictor.
Accordingly these huge serpents are regarded
as sacred by the Betsileo; nobody would dare to kill one of
them. The people go down on their knees to them and
salute them, just as they would do to a real live nobleman.
It is a happy day when a boa-constrictor deigns to visit the
village which he formerly inhabited in human form. He
receives an ovation from his family. They go forth to meet
him, spread silk for him to crawl upon, and carry him off to
the public square, where he is allowed to gorge himself with
the blood of a sacrificed ox. The souls of commoners of
good standing transmigrate into the bodies of crocodiles,
and in their new form still serve their old masters, particularly
by announcing to them the approach of the hour when they
must shuffle out of the human frame into the frame of
boa-constrictors. Lastly, the scum of the population turn at
death into eels, and to render the change as easy for them
as possible it is customary to remove the bowels from the
corpse and throw them into a sacred lake. The eel that
swallows the first mouthful becomes the domicile of the soul
of the deceased. No Betsileo would eat such eels.<note place='foot'>Father Abinal, <q>Croyances fabuleuses
des Malgaches,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xii. (1880) pp. 549-551.
A somewhat different account of the
Betsileo belief in the transmigration of
souls is given by another authority.
See G. A. Shaw, <q>The Betsileo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar
Magazine, Reprint of the First Four
Numbers</hi> (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 411.
Compare A. van Gennep, <hi rend='italic'>Tabou et
Totémisme à Madagascar</hi> (Paris, 1904),
pp. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 283, 291.</note> Again,
the Antankarana, a tribe in the extreme north of Madagascar,
believe that the spirits of their dead chiefs pass into crocodiles,
while those of common folk are reborn in other animals.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>The Great African
Island</hi> (London, 1880), p. 270.</note>
Once more, the Tanala, a tribe of south-eastern Madagascar,
suppose that the souls of their dead transmigrate into certain
animals, such as scorpions and insects, which accordingly
they will not kill or eat, believing that the creatures will in
like manner abstain from injuring them.<note place='foot'><q>Das Volk der Tanala,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxxxix. (1906) p. 362.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals in
Assam,
Burma,
and Cochin
China.</note>
Some of the Nagas of Assam hold that the spirits of
the departed, after undergoing a cycle of changes in a subterranean
world, are reborn on earth in the form of butterflies
or small house flies, only however in that shape to perish for
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
ever. Hence, when these small flies light on the wine-cups
of the living, the wassailers will not kill them for fear of
destroying some one of their ancestors.<note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <q>The Ethnography
of the Nagas of Eastern Assam,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) p. 463.</note> For a like reason
the Angamis, one of the Naga tribes, carefully abstain from
injuring certain species of butterfly.<note place='foot'>T. C. Hodson, <hi rend='italic'>The Naga Tribes
of Manipur</hi> (London, 1911), p. 159.</note> At Ang Teng, a large
village of Upper Burma, the river at a point above a dilapidated
bridge swarms with fish, which the people hold
sacred, because they imagine them to be their dead come
to life again in a fishy form. In former days no one might
kill one of these fish under pain of death. Once a Shan,
caught fishing with some dead fish in his possession, was
instantly hauled away and killed.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. George Scott and J. P.
Hardiman, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma
and the Shan States</hi> (Rangoon, 1900-1901),
Part ii. vol. i. p. 26.</note> The people of Kon-Meney
in eastern Cochin China will not eat toads, because
long ago the soul of one of their chiefs passed at death
into a toad. In his new shape he appeared to his son
in a dream, informed him of the transformation, and commanded
him to sacrifice a pig, a fowl, and millet wine
to his deceased parent, assuring him that if he complied
with the injunction the rice would grow well. The dutiful
son obeyed the author of his being; the toad appeared in
the rice-fields watching over the growth of the rice, and the
crop was magnificent. For two generations the sacrifices
were duly offered, the toad appeared at the time of sowing,
and the granaries were full. Afterwards, however, the people
neglected to sacrifice to the toad and were punished accordingly
by failure of the crops and consequent famine.<note place='foot'>Guerlach, <q>Chez les sauvages de
la Cochinchine Orientale, Bahnar,
Reungao, Sédang,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xxvi. (1894) pp. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Some
of the Chams of Indo-China believe that the souls of the
dead inhabit the bodies of certain animals, such as serpents,
crocodiles, and so forth, the kind of animal varying with the
family. The species of animals most commonly regarded as
tenanted by the spirits of the departed are the rodents and
active climbing creatures which abound in the country, such
as squirrels. According to some people, these small animals
are especially the abode of still-born infants or of children
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
who died young. The souls of these little ones appear in
dreams to their mourning parents and say: <q>I inhabit the
body of a squirrel. Honour me as such. Make me a present
of a flower, a coco-nut, a cup of roasted rice,</q> and so on.
The parents discharge this pious duty, respect these familiar
spirits, ascribe illnesses to their displeasure, pray to them for
healing, and on their deathbed commend to their descendants
the care of such and such a spirit, as a member of the
family.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <q>Les Tchames et
leurs religions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'histoire
des Religions</hi>, xxiv. (1891) p. 267.
Compare D. Grangeon, <q>Les Cham
et leurs superstitions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Les Missions
Catholiques</hi>, xxviii. (1896) p. 46.
According to the latter writer, white
horses are specially set apart to serve
as domiciles for these domestic deities.
After its dedication such a horse is carefully
tended and never mounted again.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals
in the
Philippines,
the
Sandwich
Islands,
and the
Pelew
Islands.</note>
The Igorrots of Cabugatan, in the Philippines, regard the
eels in their stream as the souls of their forefathers. Hence
instead of catching and eating them they feed them, till the
eels become as tame as carp in a pond.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Der Ahnencultus
und die religiösen Anschauungen der
Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Wiener Geogr.
Gesellschaft</hi>, 1882, p. 164; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Versuch
einer Ethnographie der Philippinen</hi>
(Gotha, 1882), p. 29 (<hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</hi>, No.
67).</note> In the Sandwich
Islands various people worshipped diverse kinds of animals,
such as fowls, lizards, owls, rats, and so forth. If a man
who adored sharks happened to have a child still-born, he
would endeavour to lodge the soul of the dead infant in the
body of a shark. For this purpose he laid the tiny body,
together with a couple of roots of taro, some kava, and a
piece of sugar-cane, on a mat, recited prayers over it, and
then flung the whole into the sea, believing that by virtue of
this offering the transmigration of the child's soul into the
shark's body would be effected, and that henceforth the voracious
monsters would spare all members of the family who
might otherwise be exposed to their attacks. In the temples
dedicated to sharks there were priests who, morning and
evening, addressed prayers to the shark-idol, and rubbed
their bodies with water and salt, which, drying on their skin,
imparted to it an appearance of being covered with scales.
They also wore red stuffs, uttered shrill cries, leaped over
the sacred enclosure, and persuaded the credulous islanders
that they knew the exact moment when the children thrown
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
into the sea were turned into sharks. For this revelation
they were rewarded by the happy parents with a
plentiful supply of little pigs, coco-nuts, kava, and so
on.<note place='foot'>L. de Freycinet, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du
Monde</hi>, ii. (Paris, 1829) pp. 595 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Pelew Islanders believed that the souls of their
forefathers lived in certain species of animals, which accordingly
they held sacred and would not injure. For this
reason one man would not kill snakes, another would not
harm pigeons, and so on; but every one was quite ready
to kill and eat the sacred animals of his neighbours.<note place='foot'>K. Semper, <hi rend='italic'>Die Palau-Inseln im
Stillen Ocean</hi> (Leipsic, 1873), pp. 87
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 193. These sacred animals were
called <foreign rend='italic'>kalids</foreign>. A somewhat different
account of the <foreign rend='italic'>kalids</foreign> of the Pelew
Islanders is given by J. Kubary (<q>Die
Religion der Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's
<hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>,
Leipsic, 1888, i. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Transmigration
of human
souls into
tigers in
Sumatra.</note>
We have seen that the Battas of Sumatra seldom kill a
tiger and never without performing an elaborate ceremony
to appease the animal's ghost. The reason alleged for treating
tigers with this respect is that the souls of the dead
often transmigrate into these animals, and therefore in killing
a tiger a man never knows whether he is not killing a
relative of his own. If members of the totemic clan of the
Tiger should happen to be in a village when the carcase of a
slain tiger is brought into it, they are bound to pay special
marks of honour to its remains by putting betel in its
mouth. A priest offers food and drink to the dead tiger,
addresses him as Grandfather, prays him not to be angry or
frightened, and explains to the gods the reasons for putting
the animal to death.<note place='foot'>W. D. Helderman, <q>De tijger en
het bijgeloof der Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxxiv. (1891) pp. 170-175.
The account which this writer gives of
the reception of a dead tiger by the
Battas agrees with, and is probably
the source of, Mr. Batten's account
cited above (pp. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals in
Borneo.</note>
The Kayans of Borneo think that when the human soul
departs from the body at death it may take the form of an
animal or bird. For example, if a deer were seen browsing
near a man's grave, his relations would probably conclude
that his soul had assumed the shape of a deer, and the
whole family would abstain from eating venison lest they
should annoy the deceased.<note place='foot'>C. Hose, <q>The Natives of Borneo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxiii. (1894) p. 165. Compare A. W.
Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal Borneo</hi> (Leyden,
1900), i. 148; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 105.
According to the latter writer the
Kayans or Bahaus in general abstain
from the flesh both of deer and of grey
apes, because they think that the souls
of the dead may be in them.</note> Most of the Kalamantans,
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
another tribe of Borneo, will kill and eat deer freely, but
there are exceptions to the rule. <q>Thus Damong, the chief
of a Malanau household, together with all his people, will
not kill or eat the deer <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cervulus muntjac</foreign>, alleging that an
ancestor had become a deer of this kind, and that, since
they cannot distinguish this incarnation of his ancestor from
other deer, they must abstain from killing all deer of this
species. We know of one instance in which one of these
people refused to use again his cooking-pot which a Malay
had borrowed and used for cooking the flesh of this deer.
This superstition is still rigidly adhered to, although these
people have been converted to Islam of recent years....
The people of Miri, who also are Mohammedan Malanaus,
claim to be related to the large deer (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cervus equinus</foreign>) and
some of them to the muntjac deer also. Now these people
live in a country in which deer of all kinds abound, and
they always make a clearing in the jungle around a tomb.
On such a clearing grass grows up rapidly, and so the spot
becomes attractive to deer as a grazing ground; and it
seems not improbable that it is through frequently seeing
deer about the tombs that the people have come to entertain
the belief that their dead relatives become deer or that
they are in some other way closely related to the deer. The
Bakongs, another group of Malanaus, hold a similar belief
with regard to the bear-cat (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Artictis</foreign>) and the various species
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Paradoxurus</foreign>, and in this case the origin of the belief is
admitted by them to be the fact that on going to their
graveyards they often see one of these beasts coming out of
a tomb. These tombs are roughly constructed wooden
coffins raised a few feet only from the ground, and it is
probable that these carnivores make their way into them in
the first place to devour the corpse, and that they then
make use of them as lairs.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Hose and W. McDougall,
<q>The Relations between Men and
Animals in Sarawak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxi. (1901)
p. 193.</note> Among the Sea Dyaks,
also of Borneo, the idea of metempsychosis is not unknown.
One of them used to treat a snake with the
greatest kindness, because he said it had been revealed to
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
him in a dream that the spirit of his grandfather dwelt in
that snake.<note place='foot'>E. H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>Seventeen Years
among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</hi> (London,
1911), p. 143.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals
in New
Guinea.</note>
Some of the Papuans on the northern coast of New
Guinea also believe in the transmigration of souls. They
hold that at death the souls of human beings sometimes
pass into animals, such as cassowaries, fish, or pigs, and they
abstain from eating the animals of the sort in which the
spirits of the dead are supposed to have taken up their
abode.<note place='foot'>F. S. A. de Clercq, <q>De West en
Noordkust van Nederlandsch Nieuw-Guinea,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Koninklijk
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig
Genootschap</hi>, Tweede Serie, x. (1893)
p. 635.</note> For example, at Masur in Dutch New Guinea there
are people who imagine that the spirits of their ancestors
transmigrated into cassowaries, and accordingly they will
not partake of the flesh of the long-legged bird.<note place='foot'>Max Krieger, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Guinea</hi> (Berlin,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 404.</note> In Simbang,
a village at the mouth of the Bubui river in German
New Guinea, there is a family who will not harm crocodiles,
not merely because they fear the vengeance of the creatures,
but also because they reckon crocodiles their kinsfolk and
expect that they themselves will turn into crocodiles at
death. As head of the family they recognise a certain aged
crocodile, everywhere known as <q>old Butong,</q> who is said
to have been born of a woman at Simbang.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber und hilf
uns!</hi> iii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 22. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Nachrichten über Kaiser
Wilhelms-Land</hi>, 1897, pp. 87 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B.
Hagen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den Papuas</hi> (Wiesbaden,
1899), p. 225.</note> They think
that while they are at work in the fields, and the houses
stand empty, their ancestors come forth from the river and
repair to the place in the roof where the mysterious bull-roarers
are kept, which make a humming sound at the
initiatory rites of young men. But when the people return
from the fields they find the houses as empty and silent as
when they left them: the spirits of their forefathers have
plunged into the river again. If a crocodile carries off anybody,
the natives are sure that the brute must be a stranger,
not one of their own crocodile kinsfolk, who never would do
such a thing; and if their neighbours at Yabim are so
unfeeling as to kill a crocodile, the Bubui people protest
against the outrage and demand satisfaction. Some Yabim
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
people give out that after death their souls will be turned
into certain fabulous cave-haunting swine, and accordingly
their relatives refuse to spear or to eat the real wild swine.
If these animals break into and ravage the fields, their
human kinsfolk attempt to appease them with offerings of
coco-nuts and other valuable articles.<note place='foot'>H. Zahn, <q>Die Jabim,</q> in R.
Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(Berlin, 1911) p. 310.</note> Similarly in Tamara,
an island off the coast of German New Guinea, the people
will not eat pork, because it is their conviction that the souls
of the dead transmigrate into the bodies of pigs.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <q>Die Berlinhafen
Section, ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie
der Neu-Guinea Küste,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie</hi>, xiii.
(1900) p. 40.</note> The Kai
people, who inhabit the rugged and densely wooded mountains
inland from Finsch Harbour in German New Guinea,
imagine that the gloomy depths of some wild ravines are
haunted by the souls of the dead in the form of cuscuses and
other animals. None but the owner has the right to kill
game in these dark and awful gullies, and even he must
propitiate the soul of every animal that he slays in such a
spot. For this purpose he spreads out offerings on the
carcase and presents them to the injured spirit, saying,
<q>Take the gifts and leave us the animal, that we may eat
it.</q> After leaving the articles long enough to allow the
soul of the beast to abstract and convey away the souls of
the things, the hunter is free to cut up and consume the
carcase. Some years ago, when heavy rains caused a land-slip
in these wild mountains, and a house with its inmates
was buried in the ruins, public opinion in the neighbourhood
attributed the disaster to the misconduct of the deceased,
who had failed to appease the soul of a boa-constrictor slain
by them on haunted ground.<note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben
der Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp.
150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals
in the
Solomon
Islands.</note>
In the Solomon Islands a man at the point of death
would gather the members of his family about him and
inform them of the particular sort of creature, say a
bird or a butterfly, into which he proposed to transmigrate.
Henceforth the family would regard that species
of animal as sacred and would neither kill nor injure it.
If they fell in with a creature of the kind, it might be a
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
bird or a butterfly, they would say, <q>That is papa,</q> and
offer him a coco-nut.<note place='foot'>Mr. Sleigh of Lifu, quoted by Prof.
E. B. Tylor, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxviii. (1898) p. 147.</note> In these islands sharks are very
often supposed to be ghosts, for dying people frequently
announce their intention of being sharks when they have
put off their human shape. After that, if any shark remarkable
for its size or colour is seen to haunt a certain shore
or rock, it is taken to be somebody's ghost, and the name
of the deceased is given to it. For example, at Ulawa
a dreaded man-eating shark received the name of a dead
man and was propitiated with offerings of porpoise teeth.
At Saa, certain food, for example coco-nuts from particular
trees, is reserved to feed such a ghost-shark, but men of
whom it is positively known that after death they will be in
sharks are allowed by anticipation to partake of the shark-food
in the sacred place. Other men will sometimes join
themselves to their company, and speaking with the voice of
a shark-ghost will say, <q>Give me to eat of that food.</q> If
such a man happens to be really possessed of supernatural
power, he will in due time become a shark-ghost himself; but
it is perfectly possible that he may fail. In Savo not very
long ago a certain man had a shark that he used to feed and
to which he offered sacrifice. He swam out to it with food,
called it by name, and it came to him. Of course it was not
a common shark, but a ghost, the knowledge of which had
been handed down to him from his ancestors. Alligators
also may lodge the souls of dead Solomon Islanders. In the
island of Florida a story was told of an alligator that used to
come up out of the sea and make itself quite at home in the
village in which the man whose ghost it was had lived. It
went by the name of the deceased, and though there was one
man in particular who had special connexion with it and was
said to own it, the animal was on friendly terms with everybody
in the place and would even let children ride on its back.
But the village where this happened has not yet been identified.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>
(Oxford, 1891), pp. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In the same island the appearance of anything wonderful
is taken as proof of a ghostly presence and stamps the place
as sacred. For example, a man planted some coco-nut palms
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
and almond trees in the bush and died not long afterwards.
After his death there appeared among the trees a great
rarity in the shape of a white cuscus. The animal was
accordingly assumed to be the ghost of the departed planter
and went by his name. The place became sacred, and no
one would gather the fruits of the trees there, until two
young men, who had been trained in the principles of
Christianity, boldly invaded the sanctuary and appropriated
the almonds and coco-nuts.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 177.</note> It must not be supposed,
however, that the choice of transmigration open to a
Solomon Islander is restricted to the animal kingdom; he
is free after death to become a vegetable, if he feels so
disposed. When a mission-school was established in the
island of Ulawa it was observed with surprise that the
natives would not eat bananas and had ceased to plant the
tree. Enquiry elicited the origin of the restriction, which
was recent and well remembered. A man of great influence,
dying not long before, had forbidden the eating of bananas
after his death, saying that he would be in the banana.
The older natives would still mention his name and say,
<q>We cannot eat So-and-so.</q><note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 33.
East Indian evidence of the belief in
transmigration into animals is collected
by G. A. Wilken (<q>Het animisme bij
de volken van den Indischen Archipel,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June 1884, pp.
988 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), who argues that this belief
supplies the link between ancestor-worship
and totemism. Compare the
same writer's article <q>Iets over de
Papoewas van de Geelvinksbaai,</q> pp.
24 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (separate reprint from <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Ned. Indië</hi>, 5e Volgreeks ii.). Wilken's
view on this subject is favoured by
Professor E. B. Tylor (<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxviii. (1898)
pp. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). See further, <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi>, iv. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
doctrine of
the transmigration
of human
souls into
animals in
ancient
India. The
doctrine
of transmigration
in Buddhism.</note>
The doctrine of the reincarnation of human souls in the
bodies either of men or of animals, which meets us as an
article of faith in so many savage tribes, has a special
interest for the historian of thought, because it has been
adopted more or less explicitly and employed, not merely as
a philosophical theory, but as a means of enforcing moral
lessons, by thinkers, teachers, and lawgivers among various
civilised peoples, notably in ancient India and Greece.
Thus in the most famous of old Indian law-books, <hi rend='italic'>The
Laws of Manu</hi>, the penalties to be endured by evil-doers in
future births are described with a precision which leaves
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
nothing to be desired: the degradation of the birth is
exactly proportioned to the degree of moral guilt of the
transgressor. For example, if a man has the temerity to
censure his teacher, even though the censure is richly
deserved, that rash man in his next birth will be an ass;
but if he defames his teacher falsely, he will be a dog;
and if he is so lost to all sense of propriety as to live
at the expense of his teacher, he will be a worm.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Laws of Manu</hi>, ii. 201.</note> A
faithless wife in her next transmigration will be born a
jackal.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, v. 164.</note> A Brahman who misappropriates money which
he has received for a sacrifice will hereafter be either
a vulture or a crow for the period of one hundred years.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, xi. 25.</note>
Men who delight in doing hurt will be born as carnivorous
animals, and those who eat forbidden food will be degraded
into worms. As for thieves, their lot is a hard one, and it is
harder in proportion to the value of the article stolen. A
man who steals gems will be born a goldsmith; a man who
steals grain will be born a rat; a man who steals honey will
be born a stinging insect; and a man who steals clarified
butter will be born an ichneumon. The penalty for stealing
silk is to become a partridge, for stealing linen a frog, for
stealing vegetables a peacock, for stealing cooked food a
porcupine, for stealing uncooked food a hedgehog, and for
stealing molasses a flying-fox. And so on for the various
degrees of moral turpitude throughout the entire range of
the animal kingdom.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, xii. 39-78.</note> Buddha himself, who gave an
immense extension to the doctrine of transmigration by
incorporating it in his religious or rather philosophical
system, is traditionally said to have undergone many animal
births of various sorts before he attained to his supreme
dignity. Thus it is reported that he was once a hare, once
a dog, twice a pig, twice a frog, four times a serpent,
six times a snipe, ten times a lion, eleven times a deer, and
eighteen times a monkey; to say nothing of having been
once a devil-dancer, twice a thief, eighty-three times an
ascetic, and so on.<note place='foot'>Sir Monier Monier-Williams,
<hi rend='italic'>Buddhism</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1890), pp. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Full, if not
always authentic, particulars of the
Buddha's manifold transmigrations are
contained in the <hi rend='italic'>Jatakas</hi>, a large collection
of stories which has been
completely translated into English by
the late Professor E. B. Cowell, Dr.
W. H. D. Rouse, and other scholars
(6 volumes, Cambridge, 1895-1907).</note>
</p>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
doctrine of
the transmigration
of souls
taught in
ancient
Greece by
Pythagoras
and Empedocles.</note>
In ancient Greece also the theory of the transmigration of
souls found favour with the early philosophers Pythagoras
and Empedocles, both of whom, if we may trust tradition,
appealed to their own personal experience in support of the
doctrine. According to ancient writers, Pythagoras affirmed
that he had been Euphorbus the Trojan in one of his former
lives, and in proof of the assertion he identified the shield
of Euphorbus among the Trojan spoils at Mycenae.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, x. 6. 1-3; Jamblichus,
<hi rend='italic'>De Pythagorica vita</hi>, xiv. 63;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>Vita Pythag.</hi> 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ovid,
<hi rend='italic'>Metamorph.</hi> xv. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> According
to Heraclides Ponticus, the philosopher
remembered his personal identity in
four different human lives before he
was born into the world as Pythagoras
(Diogenes Laertius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Philosoph.</hi> viii.
1. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). See further E. Rohde,
<hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Leipsic and Tübingen, 1903),
ii. 417 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> He
would seem to have held that human souls can transmigrate
into animals or even into plants;<note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Philosoph.</hi>
viii. 1. 4 and 36.</note> and we may suppose that
the possibility of such transmigrations was at least one of
the reasons he alleged for enjoining the strictest of his
disciples neither to kill nor to eat animals and to abstain
from certain vegetables, such as beans and mallows.<note place='foot'>Jamblichus, <hi rend='italic'>De Pythagorica vita</hi>,
xxiv. 107-109; Sextus Empiricus, ix.
127-130; Aulus Gellius, iv. 11.</note> Certainly
at a later time these principles were maintained and
these precepts inculcated by Empedocles, who outdid the
reminiscences of his predecessor by asserting that he himself
in former lives had been a boy, a girl, a bush, a bird,
and a fish.<note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Philosoph.</hi>
viii. 2. 77; H. Diels, <hi rend='italic'>Die Fragmente
der Vorsokratiker</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. (Berlin, 1906) p.
208, frag. 117.</note> Hence he denounced as a crime the practice of
killing and eating animals, since according to him a man
could never know but that in slaughtering and eating an
animal he might be murdering and devouring one of his
dead kinsfolk, it might be his father or mother, his son
or daughter.<note place='foot'>Sextus Empiricus, ix. 129; H.
Diels, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, frag.
137.</note> Thus from the doctrine of transmigration
Empedocles logically drew the same practical conclusion
as the savage, who abstains, for example, from killing and
eating crocodiles or pigs because he believes the souls of his
departed relations to be embodied in crocodiles or pigs: the
only important difference between the savage and the
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
philosopher in this respect is that, whereas the savage
venerates and spares only animals of one particular species
on the ground of their possible affinity to himself, the
philosopher on his own shewing was bound to abstain from
all animals whatever, since according to him the spirits of his
deceased relatives might be lurking in creatures of any
species. Hence while a faith in transmigration imposes but
few restrictions on the diet of a savage, since it leaves him
free to partake of the flesh of every sort of animals but one,
the creed of Empedocles logically cut him off from a flesh
diet altogether and compelled him to live on vegetables
alone; indeed, if he had been rigidly logical, he must have
denied himself the use of vegetables also and perished of
hunger, since on his theory vegetables as well as animals
may house the souls of the dead.<note place='foot'>Compare Sextus Empiricus, ix.
127-130.</note> However, like a wise
man he sacrificed logic to life, and contented himself with
forbidding his disciples the use of a few vegetables, such as
beans and laurels,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> iii. 1. 2.
7; Aulus Gellius, iv. 11. 9; H. Diels,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. p. 214, fragments 140, 141.</note> while he suffered them to browse freely
on all the rest.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
doctrine
of transmigration
used by
Pythagoras
and Empedocles
mainly to
inculcate
certain
ethical
precepts.
The
pessimism
of Empedocles
unlike the
ordinary
Greek view
of life; its
similarity
to Buddhism.</note>
So far as we can gather the real opinions of Pythagoras
and Empedocles from the traditional history of the one and
the miserably mutilated writings of the other, they seem both,
like Buddha, with whom they had much in common, to have
used the old savage doctrine of the transmigration of souls
mainly as a handle by which to impress on the minds of
their followers the necessity of leading an innocent, pure, and
even ascetic life in this world as the only means of ensuring
a blissful or at all events an untroubled eternity in a world
to come.<note place='foot'>As to Pythagoras in this respect,
see E. Rohde, <hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Tübingen and
Leipsic, 1903), ii. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At least this is fairly certain for Empedocles,
whose views are comparatively well known to us through the
fragments of his philosophical writings. From these utterances
of his, the genuineness of which seems to be beyond
suspicion, we gather that the psychology of Empedocles was
a curious blend of savagery and mysticism. He regarded
the incarnation of the human soul in a body of any sort as a
punishment for sin, a degradation, a fall from heaven, an
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
exile from God, a banishment from a world of bliss to a
world of woe.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De exilio</hi>, 17; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De
esu carnium</hi>, i. 7. 4; Clement of Alexandria,
<hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> iv. 4. 12, p. 569 ed.
Potter; Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refutatio omnium
Haeresium</hi>, vii. 29, p. 388 ed. L.
Duncker and F. G. Schneidewin; H.
Diels, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. pp. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, fragments
115, 119.</note> He describes the earth as a cavern,<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De antro nympharum</hi>, 8.</note> a joyless
land, where men wander in darkness, a prey to murder and
revenge, to swarms of foul fiends, to wasting sickness and
decay.<note place='foot'>H. Diels, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. pp. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
frag. 121.</note> He speaks with pity and contempt of the life of
mortals as a wretched and miserable existence, begotten of
strife and sighs and prolonged as a punishment for their sins
through a series of transmigrations, until, by the exercise
of virtue, they have been born again as prophets, poets,
physicians, and princes, and so return at last to communion
with the gods to live thenceforth free from pain and sorrow,
immortal, incorruptible, divine.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> iii.
3. 14, iv. 23. 152, v. 14. 123, pp.
516 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 632, 722 ed. Potter; H.
Diels, <hi rend='italic'>Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. (Berlin, 1906) pp. 207, 209,
215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, fragments 115, 124, 144-147.</note> This view of human destiny,
this passionate scorn poured on the present world, this ecstatic
aspiration after a blissful eternity, the reward of virtue in a
world to come, are very alien from the cheerful serenity, the
calm rationalism of the ordinary Greek attitude towards
existence on earth.<note place='foot'>Empedocles is cited by Aristotle as
an example of the melancholy which he
believed to be characteristic of men of
genius. See Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Problem</hi>. 30,
p. 953 a 27 ed. Im. Bekker.</note> In his profound conviction of the
manifold sufferings inseparable from mortality, in his longing
to put off the burden of the body or what he calls <q>the
garment of flesh,</q><note place='foot'>Stobaeus, <hi rend='italic'>Eclogae</hi>, i. 41. 60 (vol.
i. p. 331 ed. A. Meineke); Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>De esu carnium</hi> ii. 4. 4; H. Diels,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. p. 210, frag. 126.</note> in his tenderness for the lower animals
and his strong sense of kinship with them, Empedocles
resembled Buddha, whose whole cast of thought, however,
was tinged with a still deeper shade of melancholy, a more
hopeless outlook on the future. Yet so close in some
respects is the similarity between the two that we might
incline to suppose a direct influence of Buddhism on Empedocles,
were it not that the dates of the two great thinkers,
so far as they can be ascertained, appear to exclude the
supposition.<note place='foot'>It seems to be fairly certain that
Buddha died and Empedocles was born
somewhere about the year 480 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
Hence it is difficult to suppose that the
ideas of the former should have percolated
from India to Greece, or rather
to Sicily, in the lifetime of the latter.
As to their respective dates see H.
Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Buddha</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> (Stuttgart and
Berlin, 1906), pp. 115, 227; E. Zeller,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Philosophie der Griechen</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
(Leipsic, 1876) p. 678 note 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy
of the
physical
speculations
of
Empedocles
to
those of
Herbert
Spencer.</note>
But if on its ethical side the teaching of Empedocles
may almost be described as Buddhism relieved of its
deepest shadows, on its scientific side it curiously anticipated
some speculations which have deeply stirred the
European mind in our own and our fathers' days. For
to his savage psychology and religious mysticism Empedocles
superadded a comprehensive and grandiose theory
of the material universe, which presents a close analogy
to that of Herbert Spencer. The scientific doctrine of the
conservation of energy or, as he preferred to call it, the
persistence of force, which Spencer made the corner-stone of
his system, has its counterpart in the Empedoclean doctrine
of the conservation or indestructibility of matter, the sum of
which, according to him, remains always constant, never undergoing
either increase or diminution.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus Coloten</hi>, 10;
Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>De Xenophane</hi>, 2, p. 975
a 39-b 4 ed. Im. Bekker; H. Diels,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. pp. 175, 176, fragments 8
and 12.</note> Hence all the changes
that take place in the physical world, according to Empedocles,
resolve themselves into the integration and disintegration
of matter, the composition and decomposition of bodies,
brought about by the two antagonistic forces of attraction
and repulsion, which in mythical language he called love and
hate. And just as all particular things are evolved by the
force of attraction and dissolved by the force of repulsion,
a state of concentration or aggregation in the individual perpetually
alternating with a state of diffusion or segregation,
so it is also with the material universe as a whole. It, too,
alternately contracts and expands according as the forces of
attraction and repulsion alternately prevail. For it was the
opinion of Empedocles that a long, perhaps immeasurable,
period of time, during which the force of attraction prevails
over the force of repulsion, is succeeded by an equally long
period in which the force of repulsion prevails over the force
of attraction, each period lasting till, the predominant force
being spent, its action is first arrested and then reversed by
the opposite force; so that the material universe performs a
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
periodic and rhythmic movement of alternate contraction
and expansion, which never ceases except at the moments
when, the two opposite forces exactly balancing each other,
all things come to rest and equilibrium for a time, only
however to return, with the backward sweep of the cosmic
pendulum, to their former state either of consolidation or of
dispersion. Thus under the influence of attraction and repulsion
matter is constantly oscillating to and fro: at the end
of a period of contraction it is gathered up in a solid globe:
at the end of a period of expansion it is diffused throughout
space in a state of tenuity which nowadays we might describe
as gaseous. And this gigantic see-saw motion of the universe
as a whole has gone on and will go on for ever and ever.<note place='foot'>The evidence, consisting of the
testimonies of ancient authorities and
the fragments of Empedocles's own
writings, is fully collected by H. Diels
in his excellent work <hi rend='italic'>Die Fragmente
der Vorsokratiker</hi>, Zweite Auflage, i.
(Berlin, 1906) pp. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 173 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Compare <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Philosophorum
Graecorum</hi>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, i.
(Paris, 1875) pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Ritter
et L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Philosophiae
Graecae et Latinae ex fontium locis
contexta</hi>, Editio Quinta (Gothae, 1875),
pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Zeller, <hi rend='italic'>Die Philosophie
der Griechen</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Leipsic, 1876) pp.
678 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Herbert
Spencer's
theory of
alternate
periods of
concentration
and
dissipation
of matter.</note>
The imposing generalisation thus formulated by Empedocles
in the fifth century before our era was enunciated
independently in the nineteenth century of our era by Herbert
Spencer. Like his Greek predecessor, the modern English
philosopher held that the material universe passes through
alternate periods of concentration and dissipation, of evolution
and dissolution, according as the forces of attraction and
repulsion alternately prevail. The terms in which he sums
up his general conclusions might be used with hardly any
change to describe the conclusions of Empedocles. For the
sake of comparison it may be well to subjoin the passage.
It runs as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thus we are led to the conclusion that the entire
process of things, as displayed in the aggregate of the
visible Universe, is analogous to the entire process of things
as displayed in the smallest aggregates.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Motion as well as matter being fixed in quantity, it
would seem that the change in the distribution of Matter
which Motion effects, coming to a limit in whichever direction
it is carried, the indestructible Motion thereupon necessitates
a reverse distribution. Apparently, the universally
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
coexistent forces of attraction and repulsion, which, as we
have seen, necessitate rhythm in all minor changes throughout
the Universe, also necessitate rhythm in the totality of
its changes&mdash;produce now an immeasurable period during
which the attractive forces predominating, cause universal
concentration, and then an immeasurable period during which
the repulsive forces predominating, cause universal diffusion&mdash;alternate
eras of Evolution and Dissolution. And thus
there is suggested the conception of a past during which
there have been successive Evolutions analogous to that
which is now going on; and a future during which successive
other such Evolutions may go on&mdash;ever the same in principle
but never the same in concrete result.</q><note place='foot'>Herbert Spencer, <hi rend='italic'>First Principles</hi>,
Third Edition (London, 1875), pp.
536 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evolution
or dissolution.</note>
The most recent researches in physical science tend
apparently rather to confirm than to invalidate these general
views of the nature of the universe; for if modern physicists
are right in regarding the constitution of matter as essentially
electrical, the antagonistic forces of attraction and repulsion
postulated by Empedocles and Spencer would resolve
themselves into positive and negative electricity. On the
other hand the atomic disintegration which is now known to
be proceeding in certain of the chemical elements, particularly
in uranium and radium, and which is probably proceeding
in all, suggests a doubt whether the universe is really, as
Spencer supposed, in process of integration and evolution
and not rather in process of disintegration and dissolution;
or whether perhaps the apparent evolution of the organic
world is not attended by a simultaneous dissolution of the
inorganic, so that the fabric of the universe would be a sort
of Penelope's web, which the great artificer weaves and unweaves
at the same time.<note place='foot'>On the discovery of the atomic
disintegration of certain chemical elements,
and the general question (Evolution
or Dissolution?) raised by that
discovery, see W. C. D. Whetham,
<q>The Evolution of Matter,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Darwin
and Modern Science</hi> (Cambridge,
1909), pp. 565-582, particularly his
concluding paragraph: <q>In the strict
sense of the word, the process of atomic
disintegration revealed to us by the
new science of radio-activity can hardly
be called evolution. In each case
radio-active change involves the breaking
up of a heavier, more complex
atom into lighter and simpler fragments.
Are we to regard this process
as characteristic of the tendencies in
accord with which the universe has
reached its present state, and is passing
to its unknown future? Or have
we chanced upon an eddy in a backwater,
opposed to the main stream of
advance? In the chaos from which
the present universe developed, was
matter composed of large highly complex
atoms, which have formed the
simpler elements by radio-active or
rayless disintegration? Or did the
primaeval substance consist of isolated
electrons, which have slowly come
together to form the elements, and yet
have left here and there an anomaly
such as that illustrated by the unstable
family of uranium and radium, or by
some such course are returning to their
state of primaeval simplicity?</q></note> With such a grave doubt to
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
trouble the outlook on the future, we may perhaps say that
Empedocles was wiser than Herbert Spencer in leaving, as
he apparently did, the question undecided, whether during
the epoch open to human observation the force of attraction
or that of repulsion has been and is predominant, and consequently
whether matter as a whole is integrating or disintegrating,
whether all things are gradually evolving into
more complex and concentrated forms, or are gradually dissolving
and wasting away, through simpler and simpler forms,
into the diffused tenuity of their primordial constituents.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Empedocles
as a
forerunner
of Darwin.</note>
Just as in his view of the constitution and history of the
physical universe Empedocles anticipated to some extent
the theories of Spencer, so in his view of the development of
living beings he anticipated to some extent the theories of
Darwin; for he held that the existing species of animals
have been evolved out of inorganic matter through intermediate
sorts of monstrous creatures, which, being ill fitted
to survive, gradually succumbed and were exterminated in
the struggle for existence.<note place='foot'>H. Diels, <hi rend='italic'>Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. (Berlin, 1906) pp. 190
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</hi>,
ed. F. G. A. Mullach, i. (Paris,
1875) pp. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Ritter und L.
Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Philosophiae Graecae
et Latinae ex fontium locis contexta</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>
(Gothae, 1875), pp. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Zeller,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Philosophie der Griechen</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Leipsic,
1876) pp. 718 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Whether Empedocles himself
clearly enunciated the principle of the survival of the fittest
as well as the doctrine of evolution, we cannot say with
certainty; but at all events it is significant that Aristotle,
after stating for the first time the principle of the survival of
the fittest, illustrates it by a reference to Empedocles's theory
of the extinction of monstrous forms in the past, as if he
understood the theory to imply the principle.<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Physic. Auscult.</hi> ii. 8,
p. 198 b 29 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ed. Im. Bekker;
ὅπου μὲν οὖν ἅπαντα συνέβη ὥσπερ κὰν
εἰ ἔνεκά του ἐγίνετο, ταῦτα μὲν ἐσωθη
ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτομάτου συστάντα ἐπιτηδείως;
ὅσα δὲ μὴ οὕτως, ἀπώλετο καὶ ἀπόλλυται,
καθάπερ Ἐμπεδοκλῆς λέγει τὰ βουγενῆ
ἀνδρόπρῳρα. This passage is quoted
by Darwin in the <q>Historical Sketch</q>
prefixed to <hi rend='italic'>The Origin of Species</hi> with
the remark, <q>We here see the principle
of natural selection shadowed
forth, but how little Aristotle fully
comprehended the principle, is shown
by his remarks on the formation of
the teeth.</q> Darwin omits Aristotle's
reference to Empedocles, apparently
deeming it irrelevant or unimportant.
Had he been fully acquainted with the
philosophical speculations of Empedocles,
we can scarcely doubt that
Darwin would have included him among
the pioneers of evolution.</note>
</p>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Empedocles
as a
pretender
to divinity.</note>
It is a remarkable instance of the strange complexities
and seeming inconsistencies of human nature, that a man
whose capacious mind revolved ideas so far-reaching and
fruitful, should have posed among his contemporaries as a
prophet or even as a god, parading the streets of his native city
bedecked with garlands and ribbons and followed by obsequious
crowds of men and women, who worshipped him and
prayed to him that he would reveal to them the better way,
that he would give them oracles and heal their infirmities.<note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Philosoph.</hi>
viii. 2. 62; H. Diels, <hi rend='italic'>Die Fragmente
der Vorsokratiker</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. (Berlin, 1906) p.
205, frag. 112. Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Magic
Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i.
390.</note>
In the character of Empedocles, as in that of another forerunner
of science, Paracelsus, the sterling qualities of the
genuine student would seem to have been alloyed with a
vein of ostentation and braggadocio; but the dash of the
mountebank which we may detect in his composition probably
helped rather than hindered him to win for a time the favour
and catch the ear of the multitude, ever ready as they are to
troop at the heels of any quack who advertises his wares by
a loud blast on a brazen trumpet. With so many claims on
the admiration of the wise and the adulation of the foolish,
we may almost wonder that Empedocles did not become the
founder, if not the god, of a new religion. Certainly other
human deities have set up in business and prospered with
an intellectual stock-in-trade much inferior to that of the
Sicilian philosopher. Perhaps Empedocles lacked that perfect
sincerity of belief in his own pretensions without which
it seems difficult or impossible permanently to impose on
the credulity of mankind. To delude others successfully it
is desirable, if not absolutely necessary, to begin by being
one's self deluded, and the Sicilian sage was probably too
shrewd a man to feel perfectly at ease in the character of
a god.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
doctrine of
the transmigration
of souls in
Plato.</note>
The old savage doctrine of the transmigration of souls,
which Empedocles furbished up and passed off on his disciples
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
as a philosophical tenet, was afterwards countenanced,
if not expressly affirmed, by another Greek philosopher of a
very different stamp, who united, as no one else has ever
done in the same degree, the highest capacity for abstract
thought with the most exquisite literary genius. But if he
borrowed the doctrine from savagery, Plato, like his two predecessors,
detached it from its rude original setting and fitted
it into an edifying moral scheme of retributive justice. For he
held that the transmigration of human souls after death into
the bodies of animals is a punishment or degradation entailed
on the souls by the weaknesses to which they had
been subject or the vices to which they had been addicted in
life, and that the kind of animal into which a peccant soul
transmigrates is appropriate to the degree and nature of its
weakness or guilt. Thus, for example, the souls of gluttons,
sots, and rakes pass into the bodies of asses; the souls of
robbers and tyrants are born again in wolves and hawks;
the souls of sober quiet people, untinctured by philosophy,
come to life as bees and ants; a bad poet may turn at death
into a swan or a nightingale; and a bad jester into an ape.
Nothing but a rigid practice of the highest virtue and a
single-minded devotion to abstract truth will avail to restore
such degraded souls to their human dignity and finally raise
them to communion with the gods.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi>, pp. 81 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>-84 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi>,
x. pp. 617 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>-620 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi>,
pp. 41 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>-42 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Phaedrus</hi>, p. 249 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> Though the passages
in which these views are set forth have a mythical colouring
and are, like all Plato's writings, couched in dramatic form
and put into the mouths of others, we need not seriously
doubt that they represent the real opinion of the philosopher
himself.<note place='foot'>This is the view of E. Zeller
(<hi rend='italic'>Die Philosophie der Griechen</hi>, ii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
Leipsic, 1875, pp. 706 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), Sir W.
E. Geddes (on Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi>, p. 81 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>),
and J. Adam (on Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi>, x.
p. 618 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>). We have no right, with
some interpreters ancient and modern,
to dissolve the theory into an allegory
because it does not square with our
ideas.</note> It is interesting and instructive to meet with the
old savage theory of the transmigration of souls thus masquerading
under a flowing drapery of morality and sparkling
with the gems of Attic eloquence in the philosophic system
of a great Greek thinker. So curiously alike may be the
solutions which the highest and the lowest intellects offer of
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
those profound problems which in all ages have engaged the
curiosity and baffled the ingenuity of mankind.<note place='foot'>In our own time the theory of transmigration
is favoured by Dr. McTaggart,
who argues that human beings
may have lived before birth and may
live many, perhaps an infinite number
of, lives after death. Like Plato he
further suggests that the nature of the
body into which a person transmigrates
at death may be appropriate to and determined
by his or her character in the
preceding life. See J. McT. Ellis
McTaggart, <hi rend='italic'>Some Dogmas of Religion</hi>
(London, 1906), pp. 112-139. However,
Dr. McTaggart seems only to
contemplate the transmigration of
human souls into human bodies; he
does not discuss the possibility of their
transmigration into animals.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVII. Types of Animal Sacrament.</head>


<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Egyptian and the Aino Types of Sacrament.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Egyptian and the Aino Types of Sacrament.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
ambiguous
behaviour
of the Aino
and the
Gilyaks
towards
bears
explained.</note>
We are now perhaps in a position to understand the
ambiguous behaviour of the Aino and Gilyaks towards the
bear. It has been shewn that the sharp line of demarcation
which we draw between mankind and the lower animals
does not exist for the savage. To him many of the other
animals appear as his equals or even his superiors, not
merely in brute force but in intelligence; and if choice or
necessity leads him to take their lives, he feels bound, out
of regard to his own safety, to do it in a way which will be
as inoffensive as possible not merely to the living animal,
but to its departed spirit and to all the other animals of the
same species, which would resent an affront put upon one
of their kind much as a tribe of savages would revenge an
injury or insult offered to a tribesman. We have seen
that among the many devices by which the savage seeks
to atone for the wrong done by him to his animal victims
one is to shew marked deference to a few chosen individuals
of the species, for such behaviour is apparently regarded as
entitling him to exterminate with impunity all the rest of
the species upon which he can lay hands. This principle
perhaps explains the attitude, at first sight puzzling and
contradictory, of the Aino towards the bear. The flesh
and skin of the bear regularly afford them food and clothing;
but since the bear is an intelligent and powerful animal, it
is necessary to offer some satisfaction or atonement to the
bear species for the loss which it sustains in the death of so
many of its members. This satisfaction or atonement is
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
made by rearing young bears, treating them, so long as
they live, with respect, and killing them with extraordinary
marks of sorrow and devotion. So the other bears are
appeased, and do not resent the slaughter of their kind by
attacking the slayers or deserting the country, which would
deprive the Aino of one of their means of subsistence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Two forms
of the
worship of
animals.</note>
Thus the primitive worship of animals assumes two
forms, which are in some respects the converse of each
other. On the one hand, animals are worshipped, and are
therefore neither killed nor eaten. On the other hand,
animals are worshipped because they are habitually killed
and eaten. In both forms of worship the animal is revered
on account of some benefit, positive or negative, which the
savage hopes to receive from it. In the former worship
the benefit comes either in the positive form of protection,
advice, and help which the animal affords the man, or
in the negative one of abstinence from injuries which it is
in the power of the animal to inflict. In the latter worship
the benefit takes the material form of the animal's flesh and
skin. The two forms of worship are in some measure antithetical:
in the one, the animal is not eaten because it is
revered; in the other, it is revered because it is eaten. But
both may be practised by the same people, as we see in the
case of the North American Indians, who, while they apparently
revere and spare their totem animals,<note place='foot'>This is known, for example, of the
Yuchi Indians, for among them <q>members
of each clan will not do violence
to wild animals having the form and
name of their totem. For instance,
the Bear clan people never molest
bears.</q> See F. G. Speck, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology
of the Yuchi Indians</hi> (Philadelphia,
1909), p. 70. But in spite of the
attention which has been paid to
American totemism, we possess very
little information as to the vital point
of the system, the relation between a
man and his totemic animal. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, iii. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 311.</note> also revere the
animals and fish upon which they subsist. The aborigines of
Australia have totemism in the most primitive form known to
us; but, so far as I am aware, there is no clear evidence that
they attempt, like the North American Indians, to conciliate
the animals which they kill and eat. The means which the
Australians adopt to secure a plentiful supply of game
appear to be primarily based, not on conciliation, but on
sympathetic magic,<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> However,
Collins reports that among the
natives of New South Wales the
women were <q>compelled to sit in
their canoe, exposed to the fervour of
the mid-day sun, hour after hour,
chaunting their little song, and inviting
the fish beneath them to take their
bait</q> (D. Collins, <hi rend='italic'>An Account of the
English Colony in New South Wales</hi>,
London, 1804, p. 387). This may
have been a form of conciliation like
that employed by the American Indians
towards the fish and game. But the
account is not precise enough to allow
us to speak with confidence. It is
sometimes reported that the Australians
attempt to appease the kangaroos
which they have killed, assuring the
animals of their affection and begging
them not to come back after death to
torment them. But the writer who
mentions the report disbelieves it.
See Dom Théophile Bérengier, in <hi rend='italic'>Les
Missions Catholiques</hi>, x. (1878) p.
197.</note> a principle to which the North American
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
Indians also resort for the same purpose.<note place='foot'>G. Catlin, <hi rend='italic'>O-Kee-pa, a Religious
Ceremony, and other Customs of the
Mandans</hi> (London, 1867), Folium
reservatum; Lewis and Clarke, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
to the Source of the Missouri River</hi>
(London, 1815), i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Hence, as the
Australians undoubtedly represent a ruder and earlier stage
of human progress than the American Indians, it would
seem that before hunters think of worshipping the game as
a means of ensuring an abundant supply of it, they seek to
attain the same end by sympathetic magic. This, again,
would shew&mdash;what there is good reason for believing&mdash;that
sympathetic magic is one of the earliest means by which
man endeavours to adapt the agencies of nature to his
needs.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Two types
of animal
sacrament,
the Egyptian
and the
Aino type.</note>
Corresponding to the two distinct types of animal worship,
there are two distinct types of the custom of killing
the animal god. On the one hand, when the revered animal
is habitually spared, it is nevertheless killed&mdash;and sometimes
eaten&mdash;on rare and solemn occasions. Examples of this
custom have been already given and an explanation of them
offered. On the other hand, when the revered animal is
habitually killed, the slaughter of any one of the species
involves the killing of the god, and is atoned for on the spot
by apologies and sacrifices, especially when the animal is a
powerful and dangerous one; and, in addition to this ordinary
and everyday atonement, there is a special annual atonement,
at which a select individual of the species is slain with
extraordinary marks of respect and devotion. Clearly the
two types of sacramental killing&mdash;the Egyptian and the
Aino types, as we may call them for distinction&mdash;are liable
to be confounded by an observer; and, before we can say
to which type any particular example belongs, it is necessary
to ascertain whether the animal sacramentally slain belongs
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
to a species which is habitually spared, or to one which is
habitually killed by the tribe. In the former case the
example belongs to the Egyptian type of sacrament, in the
latter to the Aino type.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Examples
of animal
sacraments
among
pastoral
tribes.
Aino or
expiatory
type of
animal
sacrament
among the
Abchases
and
Kalmucks.</note>
The practice of pastoral tribes appears to furnish examples
of both types of sacrament. <q>Pastoral tribes,</q> says
a learned ethnologist, <q>being sometimes obliged to sell their
herds to strangers who may handle the bones disrespectfully,
seek to avert the danger which such a sacrilege would entail
by consecrating one of the herd as an object of worship,
eating it sacramentally in the family circle with closed
doors, and afterwards treating the bones with all the
ceremonious respect which, strictly speaking, should be
accorded to every head of cattle, but which, being punctually
paid to the representative animal, is deemed to be paid to all.
Such family meals are found among various peoples, especially
those of the Caucasus. When amongst the Abchases
the shepherds in spring eat their common meal with their
loins girt and their staves in their hands, this may be looked
upon both as a sacrament and as an oath of mutual help
and support. For the strongest of all oaths is that which
is accompanied with the eating of a sacred substance, since
the perjured person cannot possibly escape the avenging
god whom he has taken into his body and assimilated.</q><note place='foot'>A. Bastian, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</hi>, 1870-71,
p. 59. J. Reinegg (<hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung des
Kaukasus</hi>, Gotha, St. Petersburg, and
Hildesheim, 1796-97, ii. 12 sq.) describes
what seems to be a sacrament
of the Abghazses (Abchases). It takes
place in the middle of autumn. A
white ox called Ogginn appears from a
holy cave, which is also called Ogginn.
It is caught and led about amongst the
assembled men (women are excluded)
amid joyful cries. Then it is killed
and eaten. Any man who did not
get at least a scrap of the sacred flesh
would deem himself most unfortunate.
The bones are then carefully collected,
burned in a great hole, and the ashes
buried there.</note>
This kind of sacrament is of the Aino or expiatory type,
since it is meant to atone to the species for the possible
ill-usage of individuals. An expiation, similar in principle
but different in details, is offered by the Kalmucks to the
sheep, whose flesh is one of their staple foods. Rich Kalmucks
are in the habit of consecrating a white ram under
the title of <q>the ram of heaven</q> or <q>the ram of the spirit.</q>
The animal is never shorn and never sold; but when it
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
grows old and its owner wishes to consecrate a new one,
the old ram must be killed and eaten at a feast to which
the neighbours are invited. On a lucky day, generally in
autumn when the sheep are fat, a sorcerer kills the old ram,
after sprinkling it with milk. Its flesh is eaten; the
skeleton, with a portion of the fat, is burned on a turf altar;
and the skin, with the head and feet, is hung up.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des
östlichen Asien</hi>, vi. (Jena, 1871) pp.
632, note. On the Kalmucks as a
people of shepherds and on their diet
of mutton, see J. G. Georgi, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
aller Nationen des russischen
Reichs</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1776), pp. 406
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, compare p. 207; B. Bergmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Nomadische Streifereien unter den
Kalmücken</hi> (Riga, 1804-5), ii. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
122; P. S. Pallas, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch verschiedene
Provinzen des russischen
Reichs</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1771-1776), i.
319, 325. According to Pallas, it is
only rich Kalmucks who commonly
kill their sheep or cattle for eating;
ordinary Kalmucks do not usually kill
them except in case of necessity or at
great merry-makings. It is, therefore,
especially the rich who need to make
expiation.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Egyptian
type of
animal
sacrament
among the
Todas and
Madi.</note>
An example of a sacrament of the Egyptian type is
furnished by the Todas, a pastoral people of Southern
India, who subsist largely upon the milk of their buffaloes.
Amongst them <q>the buffalo is to a certain degree held
sacred</q> and <q>is treated with great kindness, even with a
degree of adoration, by the people.</q><note place='foot'>W. E. Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>Travels amongst
the Todas</hi> (London, 1873), pp. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> They never eat the
flesh of the cow buffalo, and as a rule abstain from the flesh
of the male. But to the latter rule there is a single exception.
Once a year all the adult males of the village join in
the ceremony of killing and eating a very young male calf,&mdash;seemingly
under a month old. They take the animal
into the dark recesses of the village wood, where it is killed
with a club made from the sacred tree of the Todas (the
<foreign rend='italic'>tûde</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Millingtonia</foreign>). A sacred fire having been made by
the rubbing of sticks, the flesh of the calf is roasted on the
embers of certain trees, and is eaten by the men alone,
women being excluded from the assembly. This is the
only occasion on which the Todas eat buffalo flesh.<note place='foot'>W. E. Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 80
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 130.</note> The
Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa, whose chief wealth
is their cattle, though they also practise agriculture, appear
to kill a lamb sacramentally on certain solemn occasions.
The custom is thus described by Dr. Felkin: <q>A remarkable
custom is observed at stated times&mdash;once a year,
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
I am led to believe. I have not been able to ascertain
what exact meaning is attached to it. It appears, however,
to relieve the people's minds, for beforehand they evince
much sadness, and seem very joyful when the ceremony
is duly accomplished. The following is what takes place:
A large concourse of people of all ages assemble, and sit
down round a circle of stones, which is erected by the side
of a road (really a narrow path). A very choice lamb is
then fetched by a boy, who leads it four times round the
assembled people. As it passes they pluck off little bits of
its fleece and place them in their hair, or on to some other
part of their body. The lamb is then led up to the stones,
and there killed by a man belonging to a kind of priestly
order, who takes some of the blood and sprinkles it four
times over the people. He then applies it individually.
On the children he makes a small ring of blood over the
lower end of the breast bone, on women and girls he makes
a mark above the breasts, and the men he touches on each
shoulder. He then proceeds to explain the ceremony, and
to exhort the people to show kindness.... When this
discourse, which is at times of great length, is over, the
people rise, each places a leaf on or by the circle of stones,
and then they depart with signs of great joy. The lamb's
skull is hung on a tree near the stones, and its flesh is eaten
by the poor. This ceremony is observed on a small scale
at other times. If a family is in any great trouble, through
illness or bereavement, their friends and neighbours come
together and a lamb is killed; this is thought to avert
further evil. The same custom prevails at the grave of
departed friends, and also on joyful occasions, such as the
return of a son home after a very prolonged absence.</q><note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
Madi or Moru Tribe of Central Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh</hi>, xii. (1882-84) pp. 336
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
sorrow thus manifested by the people at the annual slaughter
of the lamb clearly indicates that the lamb slain is a sacred
or divine animal, whose death is mourned by his worshippers,<note place='foot'>Mutton appears to be now eaten
by the tribe as a regular article of food
(R. W. Felkin, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 307), but
this is not inconsistent with the original
sanctity of the sheep.</note>
just as the death of the sacred buzzard was mourned by the
Californians and the death of the Theban ram by the
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
Egyptians. The smearing each of the worshippers with the
blood of the lamb is a form of communion with the divinity;<note place='foot'>See W. R. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of
the Semites</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1894), pp. 344
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As to communion by means of
an external application, see above, pp.
<ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
the vehicle of the divine life is applied externally instead
of being taken internally, as when the blood is drunk or the
flesh eaten.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Processions with Sacred Animals.'/>
<head>§ 2. Processions with Sacred Animals.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Form of
communion
with
a sacred
animal by
taking it
from house
to house.
Effigy of
a snake
carried
from house
to house by
members of
the Snake
tribe.</note>
The form of communion in which the sacred animal is
taken from house to house, that all may enjoy a share of
its divine influence, has been exemplified by the Gilyak
custom of promenading the bear through the village before
it is slain.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</note> A similar form of communion with the sacred
snake is observed by a Snake tribe in the Punjaub. Once
a year in the month of September the snake is worshipped
by all castes and religions for nine days only. At the end
of August the Mirasans, especially those of the Snake tribe,
make a snake of dough which they paint black and red, and
place on a winnowing basket. This basket they carry round
the village, and on entering any house they say:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>God be with you all!</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>May every ill be far!</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>May our patron's (Gugga's) word thrive!</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then they present the basket with the snake, saying:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>A small cake of flour:</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A little bit of butter:</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>If you obey the snake,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>You and yours shall thrive!</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Strictly speaking, a cake and butter should be given, but it
is seldom done. Every one, however, gives something,
generally a handful of dough or some corn. In houses
where there is a new bride or whence a bride has gone, or
where a son has been born, it is usual to give a rupee and
a quarter, or some cloth. Sometimes the bearers of the
snake also sing:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Give the snake a piece of cloth,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>And he will send a lively bride!</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<p>
When every house has been thus visited, the dough snake
is buried and a small grave is erected over it. Thither
during the nine days of September the women come to
worship. They bring a basin of curds, a small portion of
which they offer at the snake's grave, kneeling on the
ground and touching the earth with their foreheads. Then
they go home and divide the rest of the curds among the
children. Here the dough snake is clearly a substitute for
a real snake. Indeed, in districts where snakes abound the
worship is offered, not at the grave of the dough snake, but
in the jungles where snakes are known to be. Besides this
yearly worship, performed by all the people, the members of
the Snake tribe worship in the same way every morning
after a new moon. The Snake tribe is not uncommon in
the Punjaub. Members of it will not kill a snake, and they
say that its bite does not hurt them. If they find a dead
snake, they put clothes on it and give it a regular funeral.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. p.
91, § 555 (March 1885).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'><q>Hunting
the Wren</q>
in Europe.
Sacred
character
of the wren
in popular
superstition.</note>
Ceremonies closely analogous to this Indian worship of
the snake have survived in Europe into recent times, and
doubtless date from a very primitive paganism. The best-known
example is the <q>hunting of the wren.</q> By many
European peoples&mdash;the ancient Greeks and Romans, the
modern Italians, Spaniards, French, Germans, Dutch, Danes,
Swedes, English, and Welsh&mdash;the wren has been designated
the king, the little king, the king of birds, the hedge king,
and so forth,<note place='foot'>See Ch. Vallancey, <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea de
rebus Hibernicis</hi>, iv. (Dublin, 1786)
p. 97; J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>
(London, 1882-1883), iii. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(Bohn's ed.); Rev. C. Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
of British Birds</hi> (London, 1886),
p. 36; E. Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>Faune populaire de
la France</hi>, ii. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The names for
the bird are βασιλίσκος, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>regulus</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>rex
avium</foreign> (Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> viii. 90, x.
203), <foreign rend='italic'>re di siepe</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>reyezuelo</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>roitelet</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>roi
des oiseaux</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Zaunkönig</foreign>, etc. On the
custom of hunting the wren see further
N. W. Thomas, <q>The Scape-Goat in
European Folklore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xvii.
(1906) pp. 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 280; Miss
L. Eckstein, <hi rend='italic'>Comparative Studies
in Nursery Rhymes</hi> (London, 1906),
pp. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Miss Eckstein suggests
that the killing of the bird called <q>the
king</q> may have been a mitigation of
an older custom of killing the real king.</note> and has been reckoned amongst those birds
which it is extremely unlucky to kill. In England it is
supposed that if any one kills a wren or harries its nest, he
will infallibly break a bone or meet with some dreadful misfortune
within the year;<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii.
194.</note> sometimes it is thought that
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
the cows will give bloody milk.<note place='foot'>R. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Rhymes of
Scotland</hi>, New Edition (London and
Edinburgh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 188.</note> In Scotland the wren is
called <q>the Lady of Heaven's hen,</q> and boys say:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Malisons, malisons, mair than ten,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>That harry the Ladye of Heaven's hen!</hi></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 186.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At Saint Donan, in Brittany, people believe that if children
touch the young wrens in the nest, they will suffer from the
fire of St. Lawrence, that is, from pimples on the face, legs,
and so on.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris,
1882), ii. 214.</note> In other parts of France it is thought that if a
person kills a wren or harries its nest, his house will be struck
by lightning, or that the fingers with which he did the deed
will shrivel up and drop off, or at least be maimed, or that
his cattle will suffer in their feet.<note place='foot'>A. Bosquet, <hi rend='italic'>La Normandie
Romanesque et Merveilleuse</hi> (Paris and
Rouen, 1845), p. 221; E. Rolland,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>;
Rev. C. Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hunting
the Wren
in the Isle
of Man.</note>
Notwithstanding such beliefs, the custom of annually
killing the wren has prevailed widely both in this country
and in France. In the Isle of Man down to the eighteenth
century the custom was observed on Christmas Eve or rather
Christmas morning. On the twenty-fourth of December,
towards evening, all the servants got a holiday; they did
not go to bed all night, but rambled about till the bells rang
in all the churches at midnight. When prayers were over,
they went to hunt the wren, and having found one of these
birds they killed it and fastened it to the top of a long pole
with its wings extended. Thus they carried it in procession
to every house chanting the following rhyme:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>We hunted the wren for Jack of the Can,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>We hunted the wren for every one.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When they had gone from house to house and collected all
the money they could, they laid the wren on a bier and
carried it in procession to the parish churchyard, where they
made a grave and buried it <q>with the utmost solemnity,
singing dirges over her in the Manks language, which they
call her knell; after which Christmas begins.</q> The burial
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
over, the company outside the churchyard formed a circle
and danced to music. About the middle of the nineteenth
century the burial of the wren took place in the Isle of Man
on St. Stephen's Day (the twenty-sixth of December).
Boys went from door to door with a wren suspended by the
legs in the centre of two hoops, which crossed each other
at right angles and were decorated with evergreens and
ribbons. The bearers sang certain lines in which reference
was made to boiling and eating the bird. If at the
close of the song they received a small coin, they gave in
return a feather of the wren; so that before the end of the
day the bird often hung almost featherless. The wren was
then buried, no longer in the churchyard, but on the sea-shore
or in some waste place. The feathers distributed
were preserved with religious care, it being believed that
every feather was an effectual preservative from shipwreck
for a year, and a fisherman would have been thought very
foolhardy who had not one of them.<note place='foot'>G. Waldron, <hi rend='italic'>Description of the
Isle of Man</hi> (reprinted for the Manx
Society, Douglas, 1865), pp. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
J. Train, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Isle of Man</hi>
(Douglas, 1845), ii. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 141.</note> Even to the present
time, in the twentieth century, the custom is generally
observed, at least in name, on St. Stephen's Day, throughout
the Isle of Man.<note place='foot'>In <hi rend='italic'>The Morning Post</hi> of Wednesday,
27th December 1911, we read
that <q>the observance of the ancient
and curious custom known as <q>the hunt
of the wren</q> was general throughout
the Isle of Man yesterday. Parties of
boys bearing poles decked with ivy and
streamers went from house to house
singing to an indescribable tune a
quaint ballad detailing the pursuit and
death of the wren, subsequently demanding
recompense, which is rarely
refused. Formerly boys actually engaged
in the chase, stoning the bird
to death with the object of distributing
the feathers <q>for luck.</q></q> From this
account we may gather that in the Isle
of Man the hunting of the wren is now
merely nominal and that the pretence
of it is kept up only as an excuse for
collecting gratuities. It is thus that
the solemnity of ritual dwindles into
the pastime of children. I have to
thank Mrs. J. H. Deane, of 41 Iverna
Court, Kensington, for kindly sending
me the extract from <hi rend='italic'>The Morning Post</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hunting
the Wren
in Ireland
and England.</note>
A writer of the eighteenth century says that in Ireland
the wren <q>is still hunted and killed by the peasants on
Christmas Day, and on the following (St. Stephen's Day) he
is carried about, hung by the leg, in the centre of two hoops,
crossing each other at right angles, and a procession made in
every village, of men, women, and children, singing an Irish
catch, importing him to be the king of all birds.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Vallancey, <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea de rebus
Hibernicis</hi>, iv. (Dublin, 1786) p. 97;
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii. 195.</note> Down to
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
the present time the <q>hunting of the wren</q> still takes place in
parts of Leinster and Connaught. On Christmas Day or St.
Stephen's Day the boys hunt and kill the wren, fasten it in
the middle of a mass of holly and ivy on the top of a broomstick,
and on St. Stephen's Day go about with it from house
to house, singing:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>The wren, the wren, the king of all birds,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>St. Stephen's Day was caught in the furze;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Although he is little, his family's great,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>I pray you, good landlady, give us a treat.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Money or food (bread, butter, eggs, etc.) were given them,
upon which they feasted in the evening.<note place='foot'>G. H. Kinahan, <q>Notes on Irish
Folk-lore,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Record</hi>, iv. (1881)
p. 108; Rev. C. Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
of British Birds</hi>, pp. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Rolland,
<hi rend='italic'>Faune populaire de la France</hi>,
ii. 297; Professor W. Ridgeway, in
<hi rend='italic'>Academy</hi>, 10th May 1884, p. 332;
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular
Customs</hi> (London, 1876), p. 497;
L. L. Duncan, <q>Further Notes from
County Leitrim,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, v. (1894)
p. 197. The custom is still, or was
down to a few years ago, practised in
County Meath, where the verses sung
are practically the same as those in the
text. Wrens are scarce in that part of
the country, <q>but as the boys go round
more for the fun of dressing up and
collecting money, the fact that there
is no wren in their basket is quite immaterial.</q>
These particulars I learn
from a letter of Miss A. H. Singleton,
dated Appey-Leix, Ireland, 24th February
1904.</note> In Essex a
similar custom used to be observed at Christmas, and
the verses sung by the boys were almost identical with
those sung in Ireland.<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi> (London, 1879),
p. 125.</note> In Pembrokeshire a wren, called
the King, used to be carried about on Twelfth Day in a
box with glass windows surmounted by a wheel, from
which hung various coloured ribbons. The men and boys
who carried it from house to house sang songs, in one of
which they wished joy, health, love, and peace to the inmates
of the house.<note place='foot'>Rev. C. Swainson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
40 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hunting
the Wren
in France.</note>
In the first half of the nineteenth century similar customs
were still observed in various parts of the south of France.
Thus at Carcassone, every year on the first Sunday of
December the young people of the street Saint Jean used to
go out of the town armed with sticks, with which they beat
the bushes, looking for wrens. The first to strike down one
of these birds was proclaimed King. Then they returned to
the town in procession, headed by the King, who carried the
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
wren on a pole. On the evening of the last day of the year
the King and all who had hunted the wren marched through
the streets of the town to the light of torches, with drums
beating and fifes playing in front of them. At the door
of every house they stopped, and one of them wrote with
chalk on the door <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>vive le roi!</foreign> with the number of the year
which was about to begin. On the morning of Twelfth Day
the King again marched in procession with great pomp,
wearing a crown and a blue mantle and carrying a sceptre.
In front of him was borne the wren fastened to the top of a
pole, which was adorned with a verdant wreath of olive, of oak,
and sometimes of mistletoe grown on an oak. After hearing
high mass in the parish church of St. Vincent, surrounded by
his officers and guards, the King visited the bishop, the mayor,
the magistrates, and the chief inhabitants, collecting money to
defray the expenses of the royal banquet which took place
in the evening and wound up with a dance.<note place='foot'>Madame Clément, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
Fêtes civiles et religieuses</hi>, etc., <hi rend='italic'>de la
Belgique Méridionale</hi> (Avesnes, 1846),
pp. 466-468; A. De Nore, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes,
Mythes et Traditions des provinces de
France</hi> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp.
77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>Faune populaire
de la France</hi>, ii. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. W. Wolf,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii.
(Göttingen, 1857) pp. 437 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
ceremony was abolished at the revolution
of 1789, revived after the
restoration, and suppressed again after
1830.</note> At Entraigues
men and boys used to hunt the wren on Christmas Eve.
When they caught one alive they presented it to the priest,
who, after the midnight mass, set the bird free in the church.
At Mirabeau the priest blessed the bird. If the men failed
to catch a wren and the women succeeded in doing so, the
women had the right to mock and insult the men, and to
blacken their faces with mud and soot, when they caught
them.<note place='foot'>E. Rolland, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At La Ciotat, near Marseilles, a large body of men
armed with swords and pistols used to hunt the wren every
year about the end of December. When a wren was caught
it was hung on the middle of a pole, which two men carried,
as if it were a heavy burden. Thus they paraded round the
town; the bird was weighed in a great pair of scales; and
then the company sat down to table and made merry.<note place='foot'>C. S. Sonnini, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Upper
and Lower Egypt</hi>, translated from the
French (London, 1800), pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, iii. 198.
The <q>hunting of the wren</q> may be
compared with a Swedish custom.
On the 1st of May children rob the
magpies' nests of both eggs and young.
These they carry in a basket from
house to house in the village and
shew to the housewives, while one of
the children sings some doggerel lines
containing a threat that, if a present is
not given, the hens, chickens, and eggs
will fall a prey to the magpie. They
receive bacon, eggs, milk, etc., upon
which they afterwards feast. See L.
Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi> (London,
1870), pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The resemblance
of such customs to the <q>swallow
song</q> and <q>crow song</q> of the
ancient Greeks (on which see Athenaeus,
viii. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, pp. 359, 360) is obvious
and has been remarked before now.
Probably the Greek swallow-singers
and crow-singers carried about dead
swallows and crows or effigies of them.
The <q>crow song</q> is referred to in a
Greek inscription found in the south of
Russia ἕξ δεκάδας λυκάβας κεκορώνικα.
See <hi rend='italic'>Compte Rendu</hi> of the Imperial
Archaeological Commission, St. Petersburg,
1877, pp. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In modern
Greece and Macedonia it is still customary
for children on 1st March to
go about the streets singing spring
songs and carrying a wooden swallow,
which is kept turning on a cylinder.
See J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 636; A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 301; G. F. Abbott, <hi rend='italic'>Macedonian
Folk-lore</hi> (Cambridge, 1903),
p. 18; J. C. Lawson, <hi rend='italic'>Modern Greek
Folklore and ancient Greek Religion</hi>
(Cambridge, 1910), p. 35. The
custom of making the image of the
swallow revolve on a pivot, which is
practised in Macedonia as well as
Greece, may be compared with the
pirouetting of the girl in the Servian
rain-making ceremony. The meaning
of these revolutions is obscure. See
<hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of
Kings</hi>, i. 273, 275.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Religious
processions
with sacred
animals.
Ceremony
of beating
a man clad
in a cow's
skin in the
Highlands
of Scotland.</note>
The parallelism between this custom of <q>hunting the
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
wren</q> and some of those which we have considered, especially
the Gilyak procession with the bear, and the Indian one with
the snake, seems too close to allow us to doubt that they all
belong to the same circle of ideas. The worshipful animal is
killed with special solemnity once a year; and before or
immediately after death he is promenaded from door to door,
that each of his worshippers may receive a portion of the
divine virtues that are supposed to emanate from the dead or
dying god. Religious processions of this sort must have had
a great place in the ritual of European peoples in prehistoric
times, if we may judge from the numerous traces of them
which have survived in folk-custom. A well-preserved specimen
is the following, which lasted in the Highlands of Scotland
and in St. Kilda down at least to the latter half of the
eighteenth century. It was described to Dr. Samuel Johnson
in the island of Coll.<note place='foot'>S. Johnson, <hi rend='italic'>A Journey to the
Western Islands of Scotland</hi>, pp. 128
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>The Works of Samuel Johnson,
LL.D.</hi>, edited by the Rev. R. Lynam,
London, 1825, vol. vi.).</note> Another description of it
runs as follows: <q>On the evening before New Year's
Day it is usual for the cowherd and the young people
to meet together, and one of them is covered with a
cow's hide. The rest of the company are provided with
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
staves, to the end of which bits of raw hide are tied. The
person covered with the hide runs thrice round the dwelling-house,
<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>deiseil</foreign>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> according to the course of the sun; the
rest pursue, beating the hide with their staves, and crying
[here follows the Gaelic], <q>Let us raise the noise louder and
louder; let us beat the hide.</q> They then come to the door
of each dwelling-house, and one of them repeats some verses
composed for the purpose. When admission is granted, one
of them pronounces within the threshold the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>beannachadthurlair</foreign>,
or verses by which he pretends to draw down a
blessing upon the whole family [here follows the Gaelic],
<q>May God bless the house and all that belongs to it, cattle,
stones, and timber! In plenty of meat, of bed and body-clothes,
and health of men, may it ever abound!</q> Then each
burns in the fire a little of the bit of hide which is tied to the
end of the staff. It is applied to the nose of every person
and domestic animal that belongs to the house. This, they
imagine, will tend much to secure them from diseases and
other misfortunes during the ensuing year. The whole of
the ceremony is called <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>colluinn</foreign>, from the great noise which
the hide makes. It is the principal remnant of superstition
among the inhabitants of St. Kilda.</q><note place='foot'>John Ramsay, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen
in the Eighteenth Century</hi> (Edinburgh
and London, 1888), ii. 438 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The custom
is clearly referred to in the <q>Penitential
of Theodore,</q> quoted by Kemble,
<hi rend='italic'>Saxons in England</hi>, i. 525; Ch. Elton,
<hi rend='italic'>Origins of English History</hi> (London,
1882), p. 411: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis in Kal.
Januar. in cervulo vel vitula vadit, id
est in ferarum habitus se communicant,
et vestiuntur pellibus pecudum et assumunt
capita bestiarum</foreign>,</q> etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Another
description
of the
Highland
custom.</note>
A more recent writer has described the old Highland
custom as follows. Towards evening on the last day of the
year, or Hogmanay, as the day is called in Scotland, <q rend='pre'>men
began to gather and boys ran about shouting and laughing,
playing shinty, and rolling <q>pigs of snow</q> (<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>mucan sneachda</foreign>),
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> large snowballs. The hide of the mart or winter cow
(<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>seiche a mhairt gheamhraidh</foreign>) was wrapped round the head
of one of the men, and he made off, followed by the rest,
belabouring the hide, which made a noise like a drum, with
switches. The disorderly procession went three times
<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>deiseal</foreign>, according to the course of the sun (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> keeping the
house on the right hand) round each house in the village,
striking the walls and shouting on coming to a door:</q>
</p>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>The</hi> calluinn <hi rend='italic'>of the yellow bag of hide,</hi></q></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Strike the skin (upon the wall)</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>An old wife in the graveyard,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>An old wife in the corner,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Another old wife beside the fire,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A pointed stick in her two eyes,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A pointed stick in her stomach,</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend='none'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Let me in, open this.</hi></q></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>Before this request was complied with, each of the
revellers had to repeat a rhyme, called <hi rend='italic'>Rann Calluinn</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
a Christmas rhyme), though, as might be expected when the
door opened for one, several pushed their way in, till it was
ultimately left open for all. On entering each of the party
was offered refreshments, oatmeal bread, cheese, flesh, and
a dram of whisky. Their leader gave to the goodman of
the house that indispensable adjunct of the evening's mummeries,
the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Caisein-uchd</foreign>, the breast-stripe of a sheep wrapped
round the point of a shinty stick. This was then singed in
the fire (<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>teallach</foreign>), put three times with the right-hand turn
(<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>deiseal</foreign>) round the family, and held to the noses of all.
Not a drop of drink was given till this ceremony was performed.
The <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Caisein-uchd</foreign> was also made of the breast-stripe
or tail of a deer, sheep, or goat, and as many as chose
had one with them.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. 230-232. Shinty is the Scotch
name for hockey: the game is played
with a ball and curved sticks or
clubs.</note> Another writer who gives a similar
account of the ceremony and of the verses sung by the performers,
tells us that the intention of putting the burnt
sheep-skin to the noses of the people was to protect them
against witchcraft and every infection.<note place='foot'>R. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Rhymes of
Scotland</hi>, New Edition (London and
Edinburgh, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The explanation,
which is doubtless correct, reminds us of the extraordinarily
persistent hold which the belief in sorcery and witchcraft
has retained on the minds of the European peasantry.
Formerly, perhaps, pieces of the cow-hide in which the
man was clad were singed and put to the noses of the
people, just as in the Isle of Man a feather of the wren
used to be given to each household. Similarly, as we
have seen, the human victim whom the Khonds slew as a
divinity was taken from house to house, and every one
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
strove to obtain a relic of his sacred person.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Such customs
are only another form of that communion with the deity
which is attained most completely by eating the body and
drinking the blood of the god.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Rites of Plough Monday.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Rites of Plough Monday.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Processions
of
men disguised
as
animals, in
which the
animal
seems to
represent
the corn-spirit.
The
Shrovetide
Bear in
Bohemia.</note>
In the <q>hunting of the wren,</q> and the procession with
the man clad in a cow-skin, there is nothing to shew that
the customs in question have any relation to agriculture.
So far as appears, they may date from a time before the
invention of husbandry when animals were revered as divine
in themselves, not merely as divine because they embodied
the corn-spirit; and the analogy of the Gilyak procession of
the bear and the Indian procession of the snake is in favour
of assigning the corresponding European customs to this
very early date. On the other hand, there are certain
European processions of animals, or of men disguised as
animals, which may perhaps be purely agricultural in their
origin; in other words, the animals which figure in them
may have been from the first nothing but representatives of
the corn-spirit conceived in animal shape. Examples of
such dramatic and at the same time religious rites have been
collected by W. Mannhardt, who says of them in general:
<q>Not only on the harvest field and on the threshing-floor
but also quite apart from them people loved to represent the
corn-spirit dramatically, especially in solemn processions in
spring and about the winter solstice, whereby they meant to
depict the return of the beneficent powers of summer to the
desolate realm of nature.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi> (Berlin, 1877), p. 183.</note> Thus, for example, in country
districts of Bohemia it is, or used to be, customary during
the last days of the Carnival for young men to go about
in procession from house to house collecting gratuities.
Usually a man or boy is swathed from head to foot in pease-straw
and wrapt round in straw-ropes: thus attired he goes
by the name of the Shrovetide or Carnival Bear (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Fastnachtsbär</foreign>)
and is led from house to house to the accompaniment
of music and singing. In every house he dances with
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
the girls, the maids, and the housewife herself, and drinks to
the health of the good man, the good wife, and the girls.
For this performance the mummer is regaled with food by
the good wife, while the good man puts money in his box.
When the mummers have gone the round of the village,
they betake themselves to the ale-house, whither also all
the peasants repair with their wives; <q>for at Shrovetide,
but especially on Shrove Tuesday, every one must dance, if
the flax, the vegetables, and the corn are to thrive; and the
more and the higher they dance, the greater the blessing
which the people expect to crown their exertions.</q> In
the Leitmeritz district the Shrovetide Bear, besides being
wrapt in straw, sometimes wears a bear's mask to emphasise
his resemblance to the animal. In the Czech villages the
housewives pluck the pease-straw and other straw from the
Shrovetide Bear and put it in the nests of their geese,
believing that the geese will lay more eggs and hatch
their broods better for the addition of this straw to their
nests. For a similar purpose in the Saaz district the women
put the straw of the Shrovetide Bear in the nests of their
hens.<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest- Kalender aus
Böhmen</hi> (Prague, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>, preface dated
1861), pp. 49-52. Compare E.
Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur les Fêtes Religieuses</hi>
(Paris, 1867), p. 83. Similar processions
with a Shrovetide Bear take
place among some of the German
peasantry of Moravia, though there
the mummer is said to be wrapt in
skins and furs rather than in straw and
to personate Winter. See W. Müller,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen
in Mähren</hi> (Vienna and Olmütz,
1893), p. 431. This latter interpretation
may be due to a misunderstanding
of the old custom.</note> In these customs the dancing for the express purpose
of making the crops grow high,<note place='foot'>On this custom see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and the use of the
straw to make the geese and hens lay more eggs, sufficiently
prove that the Shrovetide Bear is conceived to represent the
spirit of fertility both animal and vegetable; and we may
reasonably conjecture that the dances of the mummer with
the women and girls are especially intended to convey to
them the fertilising powers of the spirit whom the mummer
personates.<note place='foot'>Real bears and other animals were
formerly promenaded about both town
and country with rags of coloured cloth
attached to them. Scraps of these
cloths and hairs of the animals were
given, rather perhaps sold, to all who
asked for them as preservatives against
sickness and the evil eye. The practice
was condemned by the Council of Constance.
See J. B. Thiers, <hi rend='italic'>Traité des
Superstitions</hi> (Paris, 1679), pp. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
We need not suppose that these animals
represented the corn-spirit.</note>
</p>

<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Oats-goat,
the
Pease-bear,
etc.
The Yule-goat
in
Sweden.</note>
In some parts of Bohemia the straw-clad man in these
Shrovetide processions is called, not the Bear, but the Oats-goat,
and he wears horns on his head to give point to the
name.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, pp. 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These different names and disguises indicate that
in some places the corn-spirit is conceived as a bear and in
others as a goat. Many examples of the conception of the
corn-spirit as a goat have already been cited;<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> the conception
of him as a bear seems to be less common. In the
neighbourhood of Gniewkowo, in Prussian Lithuania, the
two ideas are combined, for on Twelfth Day a man wrapt in
pease-straw to represent a Bear and another wrapt in oats-straw
to represent a Goat go together about the village;
they imitate the actions of the two animals and perform
dances, for which they receive a present in every house.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 190.</note> At
Marburg in Steiermark the corn-spirit figures now as a wolf
and now as a bear. The man who gave the last stroke at
threshing is called the Wolf. All the other men flee from
the barn, and wait till the Wolf comes forth; whereupon
they pounce on him, wrap him in straw to resemble a wolf,
and so lead him about the village. He keeps the name of
Wolf till Christmas, when he is wrapt in a goat's skin and
led from house to house as a Pease-bear at the end of a
rope.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 188.</note> In this custom the dressing of the mummer in a
goat's skin seems to mark him out as the representative of a
goat; so that here the mythical fancy of the people apparently
hesitates between a goat, a bear, and a wolf as the
proper embodiment of the corn-spirit. In Scandinavia the
conception of the spirit as a goat who appears at Christmas
(<foreign rend='italic'>Julbuck</foreign>) appears to be common. Thus, for example, in
Bergslagshärad (Sweden) it used to be customary at Christmas
to lead about a man completely wrapt in corn-straw
and wearing a goat's horns on his head: he personated the
Yule-goat.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 191-193.</note> In some parts of Sweden a regular feature of
the little Christmas drama is a pretence of slaughtering the
Yule-goat, who, however, comes to life again. The actor,
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
hidden by a coverlet made of skins and wearing a pair of
formidable horns, is led into the room by two men, who make
believe to slaughter him, while they sing verses referring to
the mantles of various colours, red, blue, white, and yellow,
which they laid on him, one after the other. At the conclusion
of the song, the Yule-goat, after feigning death,
jumps up and skips about to the amusement of the
spectators.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 184 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Willstad after supper on Christmas evening,
while the people are dancing <q>the angel dance</q> for the sake
of ensuring a good crop of flax, some long stalks of the
Yule straw, either of wheat or rye, are made up into the
likeness of a goat, which is thrown among the dancers with
the cry, <q>Catch the Yule-goat!</q> The custom in Dalarne
is similar, except that there the straw-animal goes by the
name of the Yule-ram.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 196.</note> In these customs the identification
of the Yule-goat or the Yule-ram with the corn-spirit seems
unmistakable. As if to clinch the argument it is customary
in Denmark and Sweden to bake cakes of fine meal at
Christmas in the form of goats, rams, or boars. These are
called Yule-goats, Yule-rams, or Yule-boars; they are often
made out of the last sheaf of corn at harvest and kept till
sowing-time, when they are partly mixed with the seed-corn
and partly eaten by the people and the plough-oxen in the
hope thereby of securing a good harvest.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It would seem
scarcely possible to represent the identification of the corn-spirit
with an animal, whether goat, ram, or boar, more
graphically; for the last corn cut at harvest is regularly
supposed to house the corn-spirit, who is accordingly caught,
kept through the winter in the shape of an animal, and then
mixed with the seed in spring to quicken the grain before it
is committed to the ground. Examples of the corn-spirit
conceived as a wether and a boar have met us in a preceding
part of this work.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 275, 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The pretence of killing the Yule-goat
and bringing him to life again was probably in origin a
magical rite to ensure the rebirth of the corn-spirit in spring.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Straw-bear
at
Whittlesey.</note>
In England a custom like some of the preceding still
prevails at Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire on the Tuesday
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
after Plough Monday, as I learn from an obliging communication
of Professor G. C. Moore Smith of Sheffield
University. He writes: <q>When I was at Whittlesey
yesterday I had the pleasure of meeting a <q>Straw-bear,</q> if
not two, in the street. I had not been at Whittlesey on
the day for nearly forty years, and feared the custom had
died out. In my boyhood the Straw-bear was a man
completely swathed in straw, led by a string by another and
made to dance in front of people's houses, in return for
which money was expected. This always took place on the
Tuesday following Plough-Monday. Yesterday the Straw-bear
was a boy, and I saw no dancing. Otherwise there
was no change.</q><note place='foot'>Letter of Professor G. C. Moore Smith, dated The University, Sheffield,
13th January, 1909.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ceremonies
of
Plough
Monday in
England.</note>
A comparison of this English custom with the similar
Continental customs which have been described above, raises
a presumption that the Straw-bear, who is thus led about
from house to house, represents the corn-spirit bestowing his
blessing on every homestead in the village. This interpretation
is strongly confirmed by the date at which the
ceremony takes place. For the date is the day after Plough
Monday, and it can hardly be doubted that the old popular
celebration of Plough Monday has a direct reference to
agriculture. Plough Monday is the first Monday of
January after Twelfth Day. On that day it used to be
the custom in various parts of England for a band of
sturdy swains to drag a gaily decorated plough from house
to house and village to village, collecting contributions
which were afterwards spent in rustic revelry at a tavern.
The men who drew the plough were called Plough Bullocks;
they wore their shirts over their coats, and bunches of ribbons
flaunted from their hats and persons. Among them there
was always one who personated a much bedizened old woman
called Bessy; under his gown he formerly had a bullock's
tail fastened to him behind, but this appendage was afterwards
discarded. He skipped, danced and cut capers,
and carried a money-box soliciting contributions from the
onlookers. Some of the band, in addition to their ribbons,
<q>also wore small bunches of corn in their hats, from which
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
the wheat was soon shaken out by the ungainly jumping
which they called dancing. Occasionally, if the winter was
severe, the procession was joined by threshers carrying their
flails, reapers bearing their sickles, and carters with their long
whips, which they were ever cracking to add to the noise,
while even the smith and the miller were among the number,
for the one sharpened the plough-shares and the other ground
the corn; and Bessy rattled his box and danced so high
that he shewed his worsted stockings and corduroy breeches;
and very often, if there was a thaw, tucked up his gown
skirts under his waistcoat, and shook the bonnet off his head,
and disarranged the long ringlets that ought to have concealed
his whiskers.</q> Sometimes among the mummers there
was a Fool, who wore the skin of a calf with the tail hanging
down behind, and wielded a stick with an inflated bladder
tied to it, which he applied with rude vigour to the heads and
shoulders of the human team. Another mummer generally
wore a fox's skin in the form of a hood with the tail dangling
on his back. If any churl refused to contribute to
the money-box, the plough-bullocks put their shoulders to
the plough and ploughed up the ground in front of his door.<note place='foot'>R. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Book of Days</hi>
(London and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 94
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
New Edition (London, 1883), i. 506
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British
Popular Customs</hi> (London, 1876), pp.
37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic,
1863), pp. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi> (Berlin, 1875), pp.
557 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; T. Fairman Ordish, <q>English
Folk-drama,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iv. (1893) pp.
163 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, viii. (1897) p.
184; E. K. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Mediaeval
Stage</hi> (Oxford, 1903), i. 208-210; H.
Munro Chadwick, <hi rend='italic'>The Origin of the
English Nation</hi> (Cambridge, 1907),
p. 238. Counties in which the custom
of Plough Monday is reported to have
been observed are Norfolk, Cambridgeshire,
Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire,
Lincolnshire, Leicestershire,
Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Cheshire,
and Yorkshire. Thus the custom
would seem to have been characteristic
of a group of counties in the centre of
England. In January 1887, I witnessed
the ceremony in the streets of Cambridge.
Wooden ploughs of a primitive
sort were dragged about by bands of
young men who were profusely decked
with scarves and ribbons. They ran
at a good pace, and beside them ran
a companion with a money-box collecting
donations. Amongst them I did
not observe any woman or man in
female attire. Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, v. (1887) p. 161.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The object
of the
dances on
Plough
Monday is
probably
to ensure
the growth
of the corn.</note>
The clue to the meaning of these curious rites is
probably furnished by the dances or rather jumps of the
men who wore bunches of corn in their hats. When we
remember how often on the Continent about the same time
of year the peasants dance and jump for the express purpose
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
of making the crops grow tall, we may conjecture with some
probability that the intention of the dancers on Plough
Monday was similar; the original notion, we may suppose,
was that the corn would grow that year just as high as the
dancers leaped. If that was so, we need not wonder at
the agility displayed on these occasions by the yokels in
general and by Bessy in particular. What stronger incentive
could they have to exert themselves than the belief
that the higher they leaped into the air the higher would
sprout the corn-stalks? In short, the whole ceremony was
probably a magical rite intended to procure a good crop.
The principle on which it rested was the familiar one of
homoeopathic or imitative magic: by mimicking the act of
ploughing and the growth of the corn the mummers hoped
to ensure the success of the real ploughing, which was soon
to take place.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Straw-bear
a
representative
of the
corn-spirit.</note>
If such was the real meaning of the ritual of Plough
Monday, we may the more confidently assume that the
Straw-bear who makes his appearance at Whittlesey in
Cambridgeshire on the day after Plough Monday represents
indeed the corn-spirit. What could be more appropriate
than for that beneficent being to manifest himself from
house to house the very day after a magical ceremony had
been performed to quicken the growth of the corn?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rites
of Plough
Monday
resemble
the rites at
the end of
the Carnival
in
Thrace.
Similar
rites are
performed
at the same
time by the
Bulgarian
peasants of
Thrace. The intention
of the
rites is
clearly to
fertilise the
ground.</note>
The foregoing interpretation of the rites observed in
England on Plough Monday tallies well with the explanation
which I have given of the very similar rites annually
performed at the end of the Carnival in Thrace.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The mock
ploughing is probably practised for the same purpose in
both cases, and what that purpose is may be safely inferred
from the act of sowing and the offering of prayers for
abundant crops which accompany and explain the Thracian
ceremony. It deserves to be noted that ceremonies of the
same sort and closely resembling those of Plough Monday
are not confined to the Greek villages of Thrace but are
observed also by the Bulgarians of that province at the same
time, namely, on the Monday of the last week in Carnival.
Thus at Malko-Tirnovsko, in the district of Adrianople, a
procession of mummers goes through the streets on that day.
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
The principal personages in it bear the names of the <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Kukerica</foreign>. The <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> is a man clad in a goatskin. His
face is blackened with soot and he wears on his head a high
shaggy hat made of an entire skin. Bells jingle at his girdle,
and in his hand he carries a club. The <foreign rend='italic'>Kukerica</foreign>, who sometimes
goes by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>Baba</foreign>, that is, <q>Old Woman,</q> is
a man disguised in petticoats with his face blackened. Other
figures in the procession are young men dressed as girls, and
girls dressed as men and wearing masks. Bears are represented
by dogs wrapt in bearskins. A king, a judge, and
other officials are personated by other mummers; they
hold a mock court and those whom they condemn receive
a bastinado. Some of the maskers carry clubs; it is their
duty to beat all who fall into their hands and to levy contributions
from them. The play and gestures of the <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Kukerica</foreign> are wanton and lascivious: the songs and
cries addressed to the <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> are also very cynical. Towards
evening two of the company are yoked to a plough, and the
<foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> ploughs a few furrows, which he thereupon sows with
corn. After sunset he puts off his disguise, is paid for his
trouble, and carouses with his fellows. The people believe
that the man who plays the part of <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> commits a deadly
sin, and the priests make vain efforts to abolish the custom.
At the village of Kuria, in the district of Losengrad, the
custom is in general the same, but there are some significant
variations. The money collected by the mummers is used
to buy wine, which is distributed among all the villagers at
a banquet in the evening. On this occasion a cake in which
an old coin has been baked is produced by the <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign>, broken
into bits, and so divided among all present. If the bit with
the coin in it falls to a farmer, then the crops will be good
that year; but if it falls to a herdsman, then the cattle will
thrive. Finally, the <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> ploughs a small patch of ground,
<q>bending his body to right and left in order to indicate
symbolically the ears of corn bending under the weight of
the grain.</q> The others lay hold of the man with whom the
coin was found, bind him by the feet, and drag him over the
land that has just been ploughed.<note place='foot'>G. Kazarow, <q>Karnevalbräuche in Bulgarien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
xi. (1908) pp. 407 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In these observances the
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
intention of promoting the fertility of the ground is unmistakable;
the ploughman's imitation of the cornstalks bending
under their own weight is a simple case of homoeopathic
or imitative magic, while the omens drawn from the occupation
of the person who obtains the piece of cake with the
coin in it indicate that the ceremony is designed to quicken
the herds as well as the crops. We can hardly doubt that
the same serious motive underlies the seemingly wanton
gestures of the principal actors and explains the loose
character of the songs and words which accompany the
ceremony. Nor is it hard to divine the reason for dragging
over the fresh furrows the man who is lucky enough to get
the coin in the cake. He is probably looked on as an
embodiment of the corn-spirit, and in that character is compelled
to fertilise the ground by bodily contact with the
newly-ploughed earth.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
customs
are observed
at
the Carnival
in
Bulgaria.</note>
Similar customs are observed at the Carnival not only
by Bulgarian peasants in Thrace but also here and there in
Bulgaria itself. In that country the leading personage of the
masquerade is the <foreign rend='italic'>Baba</foreign>, that is, the Old Woman or Mother.
The part is played by a man in woman's clothes; she, or
rather he, wears no mask, but in many villages she carries a
spindle with which she spins. The <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> and the <foreign rend='italic'>Kukerica</foreign>
also figure in the performance, but they are subordinate to
the Old Woman or Mother. Their costume varies in
different villages. Usually they are clad in skins with
a girdle of lime-tree bark and five or six bells fastened to
it; on their back they wear a hump made up of rags. But
the principal feature in their attire consists of their masks,
which represent the heads of animals and men in fantastic
combinations, such as the horned head of a man or a bird,
the head of a ram, a bull, and so on. Much labour is spent
on the manufacture of these masks. Early in the morning
of Cheese Monday (the Monday of the last week in Carnival)
the mummers go about the village levying contributions.
Towards noon they form a procession and go from house to
house. In every house they dance a round dance, while
the Old Woman spins. It is believed that if any house-holder
contrives to carry off the Old Woman and secrete
her, a blessing and prosperity will enter into his dwelling;
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
but the maskers defend the Old Woman stoutly against all
such attempts of individuals to appropriate her beneficent
presence. After the dance the mummers receive gifts of
money, eggs, meal, and so on. Towards evening a round
dance is danced in the village square, and there the Old
Woman yokes the <foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Kukerica</foreign> to a plough, ploughs
with it a small piece of ground, and sows the ground with
corn. Next day the performers reassemble, sell the presents
they had collected, and with the produce hold a feast in the
house of the Old Woman. It is supposed that if strange
maskers make their way into a village, fertility will be drawn
away to the village from which they have come; hence the
villagers resist an inroad of strange maskers at any price.
In general the people believe that the masquerade is performed
for the purpose of increasing the luck and fertility of
the village.<note place='foot'>G. Kazarow, <q>Karnevalbräuche in Bulgarien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft,</hi>
xi. (1908) pp. 408 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In all these
cases the
ceremonial
ploughing
and sowing
are probably
charms
to ensure
the growth
of the
crops.</note>
In these Bulgarian rites, accordingly, we are not left to
form conjectures as to the intention with which they are
practised; that intention is plainly avowed, and it is no
other than the one which we have inferred for the similar
rites observed in Thrace at the same season and in England
on Plough Monday. In all these cases it is reasonable to
suppose that the real aim of the ceremonial ploughing and
sowing of the ground is thereby, on the principles of
homoeopathic or imitative magic, to ensure the growth
of the corn on all the fields of the community. Perhaps we
may go a step further and suggest that in the Bulgarian
Old Woman or Mother, who guides the plough and sows
the seed, and whose presence is believed to bring a blessing
to any household that can contrive to appropriate her, we
have the rustic prototype of Demeter, the Corn-Mother, who
in the likeness of an Old Woman brought a blessing to the
house of Celeus, king of Eleusis, and restored their lost
fertility to the fallow Eleusinian fields. And in the pair of
mummers, man and woman, who draw the plough, may we
not discern the rude originals of Pluto and Persephone? If
that is so, the gods of Greece are not wholly dead; they
still hide their diminished heads in the cottages of the
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
peasantry, to come forth on sunshine holidays and parade,
with a simple but expressive pageantry, among a gazing
crowd of rustics, at the very moment of the year when their
help is most wanted by the husbandman.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Such rites
no doubt
date from
a remote
antiquity.</note>
Be that as it may, these rites still practised by the
peasantry at opposite ends of Europe, no doubt date from
an extremely early age in the history of agriculture. They
are probably far older than Christianity, older even than
those highly developed forms of Greek religion with which
ancient writers and artists have made us familiar, but which
have been for so many centuries a thing of the past. Thus
it happens that, while the fine flower of the religious
consciousness in myth, ritual, and art is fleeting and
evanescent, its simpler forms are comparatively stable
and permanent, being rooted deep in those principles of
common minds which bid fair to outlive all the splendid but
transient creations of genius. It may be that the elaborate
theologies, the solemn rites, the stately temples, which now
attract the reverence or the wonder of mankind, are destined
themselves to pass away like <q>all Olympus' faded hierarchy,</q>
and that simple folk will still cherish the simple faiths of
their nameless and dateless forefathers, will still believe in
witches and fairies, in ghosts and hobgoblins, will still
mumble the old spells and make the old magic passes, when
the muezzin shall have ceased to call the faithful to prayer
from the minarets of St. Sophia, and when the worshippers
shall gather no more in the long-drawn aisles of Nôtre
Dame and under the dome of St. Peter's.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note: The Ceremony of the Horse at Rice-Harvest Among
The Garos.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Effigy of a
horse in a
harvest
festival of
the Garos.</note>
Among the Garos, an agricultural tribe of Assam, the close of the
rice-harvest is celebrated by a festival in which the effigy of a horse
figures prominently. The intention of the ceremony is not stated,
but possibly it may be to ensure a good rice crop in the following
year. If so, the artificial horse of the Garos would be analogous to
the October horse of the Romans, as that animal has been explained
by W. Mannhardt. For the sake of comparison it may be well to
subjoin Major A. Playfair's account of the Garo ceremony:&mdash;<note place='foot'>Major A. Playfair, <hi rend='italic'>The Garos</hi> (London, 1909), pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Major
Playfair's
description
of the
festival.</note>
<q rend='pre'>When the rice harvest has been fully gathered in, the great
sacrifice and festival of the year, the <foreign rend='italic'>Wangala</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Guréwata</foreign>, takes
place. This is the most festive observance of the year, and combines
religious sacrifice with much conviviality. It is celebrated by
all sections of the tribe except the Duals and some Plains Garos.
The cost of the entertainment falls principally on the <foreign rend='italic'>nokma</foreign> [headman]
of the village, who provides a pig to be eaten by his guests,
and plenty of liquor. Among the Akawés and Chisaks of the north
and north-eastern hills a curious feature of the ceremony is the
manufacture of <foreign rend='italic'>guré</foreign> or <q>horses</q> out of pieces of plantain-stem for
the body, and of bamboo for the head and legs. The image of the
<q>horse</q> is laid on the floor of the <foreign rend='italic'>nokma's</foreign> house, and the assembled
guests dance and sing around it the whole night long, with the
usual intervals for refreshments. Early the next morning, the
<q>horse</q> is taken to the nearest river and launched on the water to
find its way down stream on the current. For those who possess
the necessary paraphernalia, the <foreign rend='italic'>guré</foreign> takes the shape of a horse's
head of large size, made of straw, and covered with cloth. I once
saw one in the village of Rongrong, which, when in use, was ornamented
with discs of brass on both sides of the face. Its eyes and
ears were made of the same metal, and between the ears were fixed
a pair of wild goat's horns. To the head were attached a number
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
of bronze bells similar to those hawked about by Bhutia pedlars.
The owner, a <foreign rend='italic'>laskar</foreign>, was unable to tell me whence they came, but
said that they were inherited from his wife's mother, and were many
generations old.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dance of a
man wearing
the
mask of a
horse's
head.</note>
<q rend='pre'>The manner in which this form of <foreign rend='italic'>guré</foreign> is used is the following.
The head is mounted on a stick, which a man holds before
him in such a way that the head comes up to the level of his chest.
Two straps pass over his shoulders to relieve his hands of the
weight. The body of the <q>horse</q> is then built round his own body
with cane and cloth. For a tail, yak's tails are fastened in with his
own hair, which, for the occasion, is allowed to hang down instead
of being tied up. The performer thus apparelled, commences to
dance a shuffling step to the usual music. In front of him dances
the priest, who goes through the pantomime of beckoning the
animal to come to him. The remaining guests of the <foreign rend='italic'>nokma</foreign>
[headman] form a <emph>queue</emph> behind the 'horse,' and dance after it.
When the first man gets tired, another takes his place, and the
dancing goes on right through the night. A pleasant part of the
performance is the pelting of the <foreign rend='italic'>guré</foreign> with eggs. A piece of
egg-shell was still sticking to the horn of the <foreign rend='italic'>guré</foreign> which was shown
to me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Strictly speaking, this festival should last for three days and
two nights. When it is over, the <foreign rend='italic'>guré</foreign> is taken to a stream and the
body thrown into the water, the head being preserved for another
year. The people who come to see it off, bring rice with them, and
a meal by the water's edge closes the proceedings.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>At the <foreign rend='italic'>Wangala</foreign>, it is the custom to mix flour with water, and
for the assembled people to dip their hands into the mixture and
make white hand-marks on the posts and walls of the house and on
the backs of the guests.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The effigy
of the horse
at rice-harvest
perhaps
represents
the spirit
of the rice.</note>
Can it be that the horse whose effigy is thus made at rice-harvest
and thrown into the water, while the head is kept for
another year, represents the spirit of the rice? If that were so, the
pelting of the head with eggs would be a charm to ensure fertility
and the throwing of it into water would be a rain-charm. And on
the same theory the horse's head would be comparable to the horse-headed
Demeter of Phigalia<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</note> as well as to the head of the October
horse at Rome, which was nailed to a wall, probably to be kept
there till next October. If we knew more about the rites of the
horse-headed Demeter at Phigalia, we might find that amongst them
was a dance of a man or woman who wore the mask of a horse's
head and personated the goddess herself, just as, if I am right, the
man who dances disguised as a horse at the harvest festival of the
Garos, represents the spirit of the rice dancing among the garnered
sheaves. The conjecture is to some extent supported by the remains
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
of the magnificent marble drapery, which once adorned the colossal
statue of Demeter or Persephone in the sanctuary of the two goddesses
at Lycosura, in Arcadia; for on that drapery are carved rows of semi-human,
semi-bestial figures dancing and playing musical instruments;
the bodies of the figures are those of women, but their heads, paws,
and feet are those of animals. Among the heads set on the figures
are those of a horse, a pig, a cat or a hare, and apparently an ass.<note place='foot'>See my note on Pausanias, viii. 37. 3 (vol. iv. pp. 375 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
It is reasonable to suppose that these dancing figures represent a
ritual dance which was actually performed in the rites of Demeter
and Persephone by masked men or women, who personated the
goddesses in their character of beasts.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Ab, a Jewish month, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ababu, a tribe of the Congo, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abchases of the Caucasus, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abdication, temporary, of chief, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aberdeenshire, harvest customs in, i. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abipones, the, of Paraguay, i. 308, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acagchemem tribe of California, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achinese, the, i. 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acosta, J. de, quoted, i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acropolis of Athens, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Actium, games celebrated at, i. 80, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adair, James, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adeli, the, of the Slave Coast, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis, i. 214, 216, 258, 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the boar, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Aegis</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aesculapius at Pergamus, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeson and Medea, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agbasia, a Ewe god, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agni, Indian god, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Agnus castus</foreign>, i. 116 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Agriculture'/>
<l>Agricultural year determined by observation of the Pleiades, i. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agriculture, magical significance of games in primitive, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of, 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>woman's part in primitive, 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aino, the, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, their ceremony at eating new millet, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of eagle-owls, eagles, and hawks, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their propitiation of mice, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ambiguous attitude towards the bear, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>type of animal sacrament, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Japan, their custom of killing bears ceremonially, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Saghalien, their bear-festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aïsawa or Isowa, order of saints in Morocco, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ajumba hunter, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A-Kamba, the, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaskan hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albania, custom as to locusts and beetles in, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcyonian Lake, the, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alder branches, sacrificial, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alectrona, daughter of the Sun, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfoors of Minahassa, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alligators, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Souls, Feast of, i. 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alur tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alus, custom at, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amambwe, the, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amaxosa Caffres, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amazons of Dahomey, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amazulu, the, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amboyna, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amedzowe, the spirit land, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amei Awi, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Indians, women's agricultural work among the, i. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies at hunting bears, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personification of maize, i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, ram sacrificed to, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Theban, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestors, prayers to, i. 105;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>images of, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings to spirits of, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestral Contest at the <hi rend='italic'>Haloa</hi>, i. 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Eleusinian Games, 71, 74, 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Festival of the Threshing-floor, 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancient deities of vegetation as animals, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andaman Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andree, Dr. Richard, i. 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angamis (Angami), a Naga tribe of Assam, i. 244, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angel dance, the, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angoni, the, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial custom among the, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anhalt, harvest customs in, i. 226, 233, 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animal, corn-spirit as an, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing the divine, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipful, killed once a year and promenaded from door to door, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<lg>
<l>Animal embodiments of the corn-spirit, on the, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; form, god killed in, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; god, two types of the custom of killing the, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; masks worn by Egyptian kings, i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrament, types of, ii. <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals torn to pieces and devoured raw in religious rites, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language of, acquired by eating serpent's flesh, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resurrection of, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and men, savages fail to distinguish accurately between, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wild, propitiation of, by hunters, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bones of, not to be broken, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bones of, not allowed to be gnawed by dogs, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savage faith in the immortality of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of human souls into, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two forms of the worship of, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>processions with sacred, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Anitos</foreign>, souls of ancestors, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anna Kuari, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anointing the body as a means of acquiring certain qualities, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antankarana tribe of Madagascar, ii. <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthesteria, the, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropomorphism, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinous, games in honour of, i. 80, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiquity of the cultivation of the cereals in Europe, i. 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antrim, harvest customs in, i. 144, 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ants, superstitious precaution against the ravages of, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apaches, the, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apes, ceremony after killing, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apis, sacred bull, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo surnamed Locust and Mildew, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Mouse, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wolfish, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollonius of Tyana, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apologies offered by savages to the animals they kill, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apple-tree, straw-man placed on oldest, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Moab, harvest custom of the, i. 138</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arawak Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcturus, i. 47 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 51, 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ardennes, precautions against rats in the, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argyleshire, harvest customs in, i. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ariadne, Cyprian worship of, i. 209 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aricia, many Manii at, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred grove at, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arician grove, horses excluded from, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristides, the rhetorician, on first-fruit offerings, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Eleusinian Games, 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Constitution of Athens</hi>, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on men of genius, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arkansas Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arriaga, J. de, i. 173 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Art, Demeter and Persephone in, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemis, Brauronian, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemisia and Mausolus, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemision, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artificers, worship of the, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aru Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryans of Europe, agriculture among the early, i. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemism not proved for the, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash Wednesday, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashantees, the, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their festivals of new yams, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashes as manure, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of dead swallowed, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>smeared on mourner, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human victim scattered on earth to fertilise it, i. 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scattered on fields, 249, 250, 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scattered with winnowing-fans, 260, 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assam, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>agriculture in, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign> in, 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>head-hunting in, 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asses, transmigration of sinners into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assimilation of victims to gods, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men to their totems or guardian animals, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assiniboins, the, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assinie, W. African kingdom, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astronomy, origin of, i. 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asuras, the, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athamanes, the, of Epirus, i. 129</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athamas, King, i. 24, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athena, sacrifices to, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the goat, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, Queen of, married to Dionysus, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>the Metropolis of the Corn,</q> 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at killing a wolf at, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Lyceum at, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athletic competitions among harvesters, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonement to animals for wrong done to them, ii. <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attic months lunar, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attica, vintage custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attis, i. 2, 14, 214;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to Lityerses, 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the pig, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attraction and repulsion, forces of, ii. <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus celebrates games at Actium, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australia, totemism in, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Northern, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australian aborigines, i. 126, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their mutilations of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<lg>
<l>Australians, the Central, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austria, harvest customs in, i. 276, 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Awe, Loch, i. 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Awemba, the, i. 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Northern Rhodesia, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ayrshire, harvest customs in, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aztecs, their festival at end of fifty-two years, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eating the god among the, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baba or Boba, name given to last sheaf, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the Old Woman,</q> at the Carnival, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchanals of Thrace, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badagas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baden, harvest customs in, i. 283, 286, 292, 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baganda, the, i. 118, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their offerings of first-fruits, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their fear of the ghosts of animals, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagobos, the, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Mindanao, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahaus or Kayans of central Borneo, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Kayans'>Kayans</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahima, their belief in transmigration, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bakongs, a tribe of Borneo, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bakundu of the Cameroons, burial custom of the, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bali, i. 314, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rice spirit in, i. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ball, game of, played as a rite, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balquhidder, cutting the Maiden at, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Balum</foreign>, spirits of the dead, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-Mbala, the, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bananas, cultivated by women, i. 115, 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in South America, 120, 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in New Britain, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in New Guinea, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of dead man in, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banars, the, of Cambodia, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangala, the, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banks' islanders, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islands, burial custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barley awarded as a prize in the Eleusinian games, i. 73, 74, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oldest cereal cultivated by the Aryans, 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Bride among the Berbers, i. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cow, i. 289, 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, the, i. 131, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sow, i. 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, i. 271, 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baronga, the, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women's part in agriculture among the, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barotsé, the, i. 115, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassari, the, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bassia latifolia</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bastian, Adolph, quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutoland, i. 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inoculation in, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutos, the, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their customs as to the new corn, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Batari Sri, a goddess, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Batchelor, Rev. J., ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bathing forbidden, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bats, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, i. 196, 315, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies at catching tigers, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battle, mock, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavaria, harvest customs in, i. 147, 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 232, 282, 286, 287, 289, 296, 298, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bean-cock, i. 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goat, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beans, Spirit of, i. 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in Burma, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden as food by Empedocles, ii. <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear, importance of the, for people of Siberia, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ambiguous attitude of the Aino towards the, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the corn-spirit as a, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cats, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -dances, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -festivals of the Aino, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Gilyaks, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Goldi, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Orotchis, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -skin worn by woman dancer, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Great, constellation, i. 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear's liver, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heart eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Beard of Volos,</q> i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bears killed ceremonially by the Aino, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>processions with, in Europe, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; slain, propitiated by Kamtchatkans, Ostiaks, Koryak, Finns, and Lapps, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by American Indians, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beating a man clad in a cow's hide, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; boys with leg-bone of eagle-hawk, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; effigy of ox with rods in China, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; people for good luck, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beavers, their bones not allowed to be gnawed by dogs, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuanas, the, i. 316, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies before eating the new fruits, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony observed after a battle by the, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beer in relation to Dionysus, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bees, transmigration of quiet people into, ii. <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beetles, superstitious precautions against, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<lg>
<l>Beggar, name given to last sheaf, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beku, the, of West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bells worn by mummers, i. 26, 28, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attached to hobby-horse, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benin, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifice at, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bera Pennu, the Earth Goddess, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berbers, the Barley Bride among the, i. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berosus, Babylonian historian, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berry, harvest customs in, i. 292, 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berwickshire, harvest customs in, i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bessy, one of the mummers on Plough Monday, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Betsileo, the, of Madagascar, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in the transmigration of souls, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhils, the, of Central India, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhímsen, an Indian deity, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhumiya, a Himalayan deity, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhutan, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biennial cycle, i. 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festivals, i. 14, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Binder of last sheaf represents the Corn-mother, i. 150, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Binders of corn, contests between, i. 136, 137, 138, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 220, 221, 222, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Binding the corn, contests in, i. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Binsenschneider</foreign>, i. 230 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bird, soul as a, i. 181, 182 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-spirit as a, 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of prey, inoculation with a, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birds, migratory, as representatives of a divinity, i. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language of, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tongues of, eaten, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birth of child on harvest-field, pretended, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bisaltae, a Thracian tribe, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bizya in Thrace, i. 26, 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Drink, an emetic, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Goat-skin, in relation to Dionysus, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackened faces, i. 291, 299;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of actors, 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackfeet Indians, i. 311, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bladders of sea-beasts returned by the Esquimaux to the sea, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blindfolded, reapers, i. 144, 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood drawn from men as a religious rite, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a means of communion with a deity, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of bear drunk, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of beavers not allowed to fall on ground, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of dragon, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of human victim sprinkled on seed, i. 239, 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>scattered on field, 244, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of lamb sprinkled on people, ii. <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of slain men tasted by their slayers, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood-covenant, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boa-constrictor, soul of a, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boa-constrictors, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boar, corn-spirit as, i. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule, 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 302 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Adonis, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boars, wild, their ravages in the corn, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boba or Baba, name given to the last sheaf, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bock, C., quoted, i. 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boedromion, an Attic month, i. 52, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bogadjim in German New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemia, harvest customs in, i. 138, 145, 149, 150, 225 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 232, 286, 289;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Carnival custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom as to mice in, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhmer Wald Mountains, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolivia, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bombay, burial custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bone of old animal eaten to make the eater old, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bones and skulls of enemies destroyed, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of animals preserved in order that the animals may come to life again, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burned or thrown into water, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be broken, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to be gnawed by dogs, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the dead, virtues acquired by contact with the, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preserved for the resurrection, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of deer not given to the dogs, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of fish not burned, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown into the sea or a river, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be broken, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bontoc, province of Luzon, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bordeaux, harvest custom at, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bormus or Borimus, i. 216, 257, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borneo, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>agricultural communities of central, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bororos, the, of Brazil, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boscana, Father G., ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Botocudos, the, of Brazil, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bougainville Straits, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Bouphonia</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Bouphonion</foreign>, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourbourg, Brasseur de, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourke, Captain J. G., ii. <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bouzygai, the, at Eleusis, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boxing, i. 71 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahman boys sacrificed, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahmans, the, on transubstantiation, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brain, drippings of, used to acquire wisdom of dead, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brains of enemies eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brand, John, quoted, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazen serpent, the, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<lg>
<l>Brazil, Indians of, i. 111, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their flesh diet, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridal pair at rice-harvest in Java, i. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bride, name given to last sheaf, i. 162, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Columbia, Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brittany, harvest customs in, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Bromios</foreign>, epithet of Dionysus, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooke, Rajah, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, Dr. Burton, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bubui river, in New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckwheat cultivated in Burma, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bucolium at Athens, i. 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha, transmigrations of, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Budge, Dr. E. A. Wallis, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 260 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffalo sacrificed for human victim, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffaloes, propitiation of dead, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their death bewailed, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revered by the Todas, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bukaua, the, of German New Guinea, i. 103, 105, 313, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulawayo, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarians, the Carnival among the, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull, corn-spirit as, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to Dionysus, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, live, torn to pieces in rites of Dionysus, i. 15, 17, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, sacrifice of, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Magnesia, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Mithraic religion, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at tomb of dead chief, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -fights, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -roarers, i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as magical instruments, i. 104, 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -shaped deities, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulls, sacred, of ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burghers or Badagas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burial rites intended to deceive ghosts or demons, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burials, fictitious, to divert the attention of demons from the real burials, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buring Une, a goddess, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burma, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>securing the rice-soul in, i. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at threshing rice in, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>head-hunting in, i. 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burmese cure, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burne, Miss C. S., i. 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burning last sheaf of corn, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Old Witch, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buru, island, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bush negroes of Surinam, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bushmen, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their customs as to diet, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busiris, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Busk</foreign>, festival of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Butea frondosa</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterflies, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterfly of the rice, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Button snake root, emetic made from, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buzzard, killing the sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffre elephant-hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffres, their festival of new fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom of fumigating infants, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of South Africa, their observation of the Pleiades, i. 315;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Zambesi region, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign> (Old Wife), name given to last corn cut, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caingua Indians of Paraguay, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cakes in obscene shapes, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabash, ceremony of breaking the, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabria, custom observed by murderers in, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendar, regulation of, an affair of religion, i. 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Roman, 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive, 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendars, the Pleiades in primitive, i. 307 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calf sacrificed to Dionysus, i. 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed at harvest, 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of buffalo, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>California, Indians of, i. 125, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Californian missions, the Spanish, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callaway, Rev. H., i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callias, the Eleusinian Torch-bearer, i. 54, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodia, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cameron, Hugh E., i. 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, Major J., i. 248, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbell, Rev. J. G., i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cancer, Tropic of, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candlemas, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canelos Indians of Ecuador, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannibal orgies, i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Spirit, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannibals, a secret society of the Kwakiutl Indians, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canopus, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capricorn, Tropic of, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carcassone, hunting the wren at, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carian Chersonese, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carib warriors, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caribs, the, i. 120, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carinthia, harvest custom in, i. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carley, the, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlin or Carline, the, i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival, modern Thracian drama at the, i. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Bear, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; custom in Bohemia, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carolina, Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<lg>
<l>Carrier Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassava (manioc) bread, i. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassowaries, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassowary totem, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castabus, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cat, corn-spirit as, i. 280 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed at harvest, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cat's cradle, i. 101, 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tail, name given to last standing corn, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catalangans, the, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caterpillars, superstitious precautions against, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic custom of eating effigies of the Madonna, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle, last sheaf given to, i. 134, 155, 158, 161, 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>(plough oxen) Yule or Christmas Boar given to, the, 301, 302, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-fruits offered to, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caul-fat, human, rubbed on body, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cayenne, Indians of, 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celebes, i. 313, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>precautions against mice in, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celeus, king of Eleusis, i. 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Censorinus, i. 86, 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Central Provinces of India, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceram, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cereal deity, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cereals in Europe, antiquity of the cultivation of, i. 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated by the early Aryans, 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremony of the Horse at rice-harvest among the Garos, ii. <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceres, i. 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, 297 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the, in France, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman sacrifices to, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chadwars, the, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaka, Zulu despot, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chambéry, harvest customs at, i. 275, 288, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chams, the, of Indo-China, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their agricultural ceremonies, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in transmigration, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Changes of shape, magical, i. 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chasas, the, of Orissa, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Chasms of Demeter and Persephone,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastity required in sower of seed, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of hunter before hunting bears, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chateaubriand, his description of the Natchez festival, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheese Monday, i. 26, ii. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheremiss, the, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokee hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mythology, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokees, the, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their respect for rattlesnakes, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom of removing the hamstring of deer, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chicome couatl, Mexican Maize-goddess i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chief, sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acting as priest, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to dead, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiefs, spirits of dead, give rain, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deified after death, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead, in lions, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Child born on harvest-field, pretence of, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Childbed, deceiving the ghosts of women who have died in, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children at birth placed in winnowing-fans, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarded against evil spirits, 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed to sow seed, 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed at harvest, 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, ceremony at beginning of spring in, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinese, their theory as to courage, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Amoy, their use of effigies, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ceremony of ploughing, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; use of sieve or winnowing-fan, i. 6, 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinigchinich, a Californian god, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinna Kimedy, i. 247, 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chins, the, of Upper Burma, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiquites of Paraguay, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiriguanos, the, Indians of Bolivia, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chota Nagpur, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christmas, i. 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boar sacrificed at, 302. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Yule'>Yule</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; drama, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, i. 302, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chuckchees, the, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Churn</foreign>, last corn cut, i. 151, 153, 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cicero, on the gift of the corn, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on transubstantiation, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cinteotl, Mexican Maize-god, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, i. 316, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, E. D., at Eleusis, i. 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Alexandria on the Eleusinian mysteries, i. 39</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleostratus of Tenedos, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Clyack-kebback</foreign>, i. 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Clyack'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Clyack</foreign> sheaf, i. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cnossus, i. 82, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cobra-capella, guardian-deity of Issapoo, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cochin China, tigers respected in, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock, corn-spirit as, i. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed on harvest field, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, sacrificed, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sheaf, i. 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Cogiour</foreign>, a sacred pontiff, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cohabitation of husband and wife enjoined as a matter of ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Colluinn</foreign>, custom of beating a cow's hide, ii. <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colombian Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communal taboos, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communion with deity, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compitalia, a Roman festival, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Complexity of religious phenomena, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession of sin, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congo, the Lower, i. 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Upper, 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conjunction of sun and moon, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conservation of energy, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinople protected against flies and gnats, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contact with sacred things is deemed dangerous, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; between certain foods in stomach of eater forbidden, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contest, Ancestral, at the Eleusinian Games, i. 71, 74, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Contests'/>
<l>Contests for possession of the corn-spirit, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between binders of corn, 136, 137, 138, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 220, 221, 222, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between reapers, 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 136, 140, 141, 142, 144, 152, 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 219, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>between threshers, 147 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 218, 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Continence, ceremonial, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prescribed at festival, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and fasting, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coomassie, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coorgs, the, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corea, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of effigies in, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn, ear of, revealed to initiates at the rites of Eleusis, i. 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personified as Demeter, 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-fruits of, offered to Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis, 53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first bestowed on the Athenians by Demeter, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personified as female, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wreath of, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>double personification of, as mother and daughter, 207 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first corn cut, customs connected with, 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the new, eaten sacramentally, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctity of the, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and poppies as symbols of Demeter, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Baby, i. 152, 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bull, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cow, i. 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -ears, Queen of the, i. 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crown of, 163, 221, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -fool, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goat, i. 282, 283, 286, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -maiden, i. 150;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Northern Europe, 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mallet at threshing, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man, i. 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the goal of a women's race at harvest, 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn-mother, i. 150;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Northern Europe, 131 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in last sheaf, 133 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in America, 171 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in many lands, 171 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -pug, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -reapers, songs of the, i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sow, i. 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Corn-Spirit'/>
<l>Corn-spirit, contests for possession of the, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as old, 136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in last sheaf threshed, i. 139, 147, 168, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented in duplicate, i. 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as young, 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Bride and Bridegroom, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as male and female, 164, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as female, both old and young, i. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by person who cuts, binds, or threshes the last corn, 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 236, 253 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilising influence of, 168;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its influence on women, 168;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by human beings, 168, 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of an old man, i. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in first corn cut, 215;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal representative of, killed in mimicry, 216;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing the, 216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by a puppet, 224;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by a stranger, 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as poor and robbed by the reapers, 231 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain in his human representatives, 251 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the neck of the, 268;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as animal, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the animal embodiments of the, 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as wolf or dog, 271, <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. 327;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the tail of the, i. 268, 272, 300, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as cock, i. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as hare, 279 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as cat, 280 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as goat, 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lame, i. 284;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain in the form of a goat, 284 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 287;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as bull, cow, or ox, 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed in form of bull, i. 290, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed at threshing, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as horse or mare, 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of calf, 292;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a bird, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as fox, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as pig (boar, sow), 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by an ox, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed in animal form and eaten sacramentally, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a bear, 325 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented dramatically, 325;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a boar, 328;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by a man called the Straw-bear, 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stalks, harvesters wrapt up in, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, i. 272, 273, 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -woman, i. 230, 233;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at threshing, 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corners of fields not to be reaped, i. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corpus Christi Day, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cos, harvest-home in, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cotton, treatment of first cotton picked, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courage seated in gall-bladder, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>

<lg>
<l>Cow, corn-spirit as, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cow's hide, thresher of last corn wrapt in, i. 291;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of beating the, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cows milked by women, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and their milk, superstitions as to, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1 and 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranes, trumpeting of the, signal for ploughing, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creek Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cretan festival of Dionysus, i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; myth of Dionysus, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crete, ancient seat of worship of Demeter, i. 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pig not eaten in, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cries of reapers, i. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cripple Goat, the, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodile, clay image of, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -catchers, rules observed by, ii. <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodiles hunted by savages for their flesh, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often spared by savages out of respect, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies observed at catching, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kinship of men with, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respected in Africa and Madagascar, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred at Dix Cove, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronion, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crooke, W., i. 118 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 234 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crops, charms and spells for growth of, i. 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rotation of, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices for the, 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross River natives, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crow, head of, eaten to prolong life, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of sinner into, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Song, the Greek, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crown of corn-ears, i. 163, 221, 283;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by Demeter and Persephone, 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Crying the Mare</q> in Hertfordshire, i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Shropshire, 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Crying the neck,</q> i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cultivation, shifting, i. 99;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Agriculture'>Agriculture</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Cup of offering,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curcho, old Prussian god, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curetes, their war-dance, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curses uttered by Bouzygai, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuscuses, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cushing, Frank H., quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuzco, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cycle, the octennial in Greece, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynaetha, i. 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyzicus, i. 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacotas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dama, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damatrius, a Boeotian month, i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dance at harvest supper, i. 134, 135, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of harvesters with or round the last sheaf, 135, 141, 145, 160, 219, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of masked men before sowing, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Dyaks to secure soul of rice, 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of old women as representatives of the corn-goddess, 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pawnee, before human sacrifice, 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>before the king at ceremony of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Zulu king, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of medicine-man, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Green Corn Dance, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>war, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by torchlight, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Kansas Indians, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the angel dance,</q> <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mummers at Carnival, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mummer wearing a horse-headed mask, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dances, i. 246, 247;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at sowing festival, 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>masked, 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 111, 186, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the reappearance of the Pleiades, i. 307, 309, 311, 312, 317;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in imitation of totemic animals, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mexican, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in connexion with offerings of first-fruits, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men personifying deities, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women at bear-festival, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women at catching a crocodile, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>round dead tigers, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Koryak at the slaughter of bears or wolves, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in honour of slain leopards, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Koryak women at slaughter of whales, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to amuse the souls of dead sea-beasts, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Shrovetide Bear, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to make the crops thrive, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of masked men and women in ritual, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dancing for salmon, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danger Island, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danzig, harvest customs at, i. 133, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darfur, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin and Empedocles, ii. <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daughter-in-law in ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawkins, R. M., i. 25 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, 29 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, rebirth of the, i. 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear of the, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival in honour of, at end of harvest, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried in the houses, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bones of the, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourners rub themselves with the fat or putrefying juices of the, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the human, supposed to be in caterpillars, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; and in other animals, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men mutilated in order to disable their ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirits of the, supposed to influence the crops, i. 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>give rain, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-fruits offered to, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayers to, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in trees, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deane, Mrs. J. H., ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<lg>
<l>Death and resurrection of the gods, i. 1, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; pollution of, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deer, flesh of, eaten to prolong life or to avoid fever, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten by warriors, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treated with respect by American Indians, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their bones not given to dogs, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian custom of cutting out the sinew of the thighs of, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Deiseil</foreign> or <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>deiseal</foreign>, according to the course of the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deities of vegetation as animals, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deity, communion with, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delagoa Bay, i. 114, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delaware Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphi, grave of Dionysus at, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphic oracle, i. 55, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demeter, mother of Dionysus by Zeus, i. 14, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Homeric Hymn to, 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a personification of the corn, 39, 40 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from the Earth-goddess, 41, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the threshing-floor, 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 47;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in art, 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offering of first-fruits to, 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surnamed Proerosia, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bestows corn on the Athenians, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped in Sicily, 56 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bestows corn on the Sicilians, 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to her at sowing, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with seed-corn, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her epithets, 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her image at Eleusis, 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her intrigue with Zeus, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>etymology of name, 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to the pig, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>horse-headed, of Phigalia, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rustic prototype of, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Iasion, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Pelops, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Persephone, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resemblance of their artistic types, 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their essential identity, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with death and immortality, 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>double personification of the corn as, 208 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Zeus, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage of, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Black, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Phigalia, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Green, i. 42, 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Yellow, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demeter's corn, i. 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Democritus, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demons or ghosts deceived by dummies, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repelled by gun-shots, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dendereh, sculptures at, i. 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dengdit, high god of the Dinka, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denmark, harvest customs in, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 231;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Yule Boar in, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Smet, J., i. 239 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Descent of Persephone, i. 46, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devonshire reapers, cries of, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diasia, an Athenian sacrifice, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dieri, the, of Central Australia, i. 106, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Digger Indians, the, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Digging-Sticks'/>
<l>Digging-sticks used by women, i. 118, 120, 122, 124, 126, 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dijon, harvest custom near, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinka, the, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diocles, i. 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus Siculus, on worship of Demeter and Persephone, i. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysus, i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>god of the vine, 2 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>god of trees, 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a god of agriculture and corn, 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the winnowing-fan, 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Zagreus, 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>horned, 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Zeus by Persephone, Demeter, or Semele, 12, 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death and resurrection of, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 32;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of, 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grave of, 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a bull, 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a goat, 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torn to pieces at Thebes, 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his marriage to the Queen of Athens, 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Zeus and Demeter, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the bull-roarer, 110 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to Pan, Satyrs, and Silenuses, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a bull, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>live animals rent in rites of, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Foxy, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dittenberger, W., i. 77 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dius, a Macedonian month, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divination, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magic dwindles into, i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by shoulder-blade, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diviners, ancient, their rules of diet, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dodwell, E., at Eleusis, i. 64</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog, corn-spirit as, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the harvest, 273;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>feast on flesh of, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of the White, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of sinner into, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -eating Spirit, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -star, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog's flesh or liver eaten to acquire bravery, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dogs devoured in religious rites, i. 20, 21, 22;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to gnaw bones of slain animals, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bones of deer not given to, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Doll'/>
<l>Doll made of last corn at harvest, i. 140, 151, 153, 155, 157, 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D'Orbigny, A., quoted, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dormice, charm against, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Door of house protected against fiends, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dough image of god eaten sacramentally, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; images of animals sacrificed instead of the animals, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; puppets as substitutes for live human beings, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dragon's blood, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<lg>
<l>Drama, modern Thracian, at the Carnival, i. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical, 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dramatic representations of the corn-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rites practised with magical intention, i. 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams as a source of belief in immortality, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drinking juices of dead kinsfolk, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dryas, son of Lycurgus, i. 24, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Du Pratz, Le Page, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duke of York Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumbartonshire, harvest customs in, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dummies to avert attention of ghosts or demons, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Dumping</q> people on harvest field, i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumplings in human form at threshing, i. 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in form of pigs, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duplication of deities, i. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durham, harvest customs in, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyaks, the, i. 313, 314, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies to secure the rice-soul, i. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Borneo, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sarawak, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dying and Reviving God, i. 1, 33</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eagle-owl worshipped by the Aino, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eagles worshipped by the Aino, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propitiation of dead, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ears regarded as the seat of intelligence, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead enemies cut out, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earth, Mother, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the spirit of the, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -God, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from Demeter, i. 41, 43, 89;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greek art, 89;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices offered to, 245, 246, 249, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -gods, slaves of the, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mothers, i. 173 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easing nature, a charm used by robbers, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Indies, the Rice-mother in the, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eve, i. 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sunday, i. 33</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eater of animals, as epithet of a god, i. 23</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eating the god, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Aztecs, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the soul of the rice, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eckstein, Miss L., ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecstasy induced by smoking, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edonians, the, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eels, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Effigies'/>
<l>Effigies of men and women hung at doors of houses, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried with the dead to deceive their ghosts, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to cure or prevent sickness, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Doll'>Doll</ref>, <ref target='Index-Images'>Images</ref>, <ref target='Index-Puppet'>Puppet</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effigy of an ox broken as a spring ceremony in China, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eggs not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charm to make hens lay, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, ancient, stratification of religion in, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian kings, their animal masks, i. 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; reapers, their cries, i. 263</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; type of animal sacrament, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, human sacrifices offered by the ancient, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ancient, their religious attitude to pigs, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El Kiboron clan of the Masai, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elans treated with respect by American Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephant's flesh thought to make eater strong, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephants, ceremonies observed at the slaughter of, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleusine grain, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleusinian Games, i. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 110, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>less ancient than the Eleusinian mysteries, 87 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; inscription dealing with first-fruits, i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mysteries, i. 35, 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Demeter, 70</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleusis, Demeter at, i. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits at, 53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>image of Demeter at, 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayer for rain at, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Rarian plain at, 36, 70, 74, 234, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleutherian games at Plataea, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elijah, the prophet, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elis, Dionysus at, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elk treated with respect, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>embryos of, not eaten, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellis, William, quoted, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elopango, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Embodiment, human, of the corn-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emboq Sri, rice-bride, i. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Embryos of elk not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emetics used before eating new corn, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empedocles, his doctrine of transmigration, ii. <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his resemblance to Buddha, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theory of the material universe like that of Herbert Spencer, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a forerunner of Darwin, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his posing as a god, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enchanters of crops, foods forbidden to, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encounter Bay tribe, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<lg>
<l>Enemies, mutilation of dead, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Energy, the conservation of, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>En-jemusi, the, of East Africa, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphany, i. 302</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epithets applied to Demeter, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Equinox, human sacrifice offered soon after the spring equinox, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erigone and Icarius, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esquimaux, the Central, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dietary rules of, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Baffin Land, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Bering Strait, i. 150, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Hudson Bay, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essex, hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonia, i. 302</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonian reapers, i. 285;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>peasants, their treatment of weevils, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonians, the, i. 298, 300, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etna, Mount, i. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etymology, its uncertainty as a base for mythological theories, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eubuleus, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eubulus, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudoxus of Cnidus, i. 81, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eumolpids, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eumolpus, i. 37, 70, 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphorbus the Trojan, ii. <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, Corn-mother and Corn-maiden in Northern, i. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evolution and dissolution, ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewe hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; negroes, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their festival of new yams, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief as to the spirit-land, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies after killing leopards, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exclusion of strangers, i. 94, 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eyes shut at prayer, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men eaten, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slaughtered animals cut out, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead enemies gouged out, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faces of bear-hunters painted red and black, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blackened, i. 291, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fady</hi>, taboo, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fafnir, the dragon, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falcon's eye used as charm, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faleshas, a Jewish sect, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fallow, thrice-ploughed, i. 66, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lands allowed to lie, 117, 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fanning away ill luck, i. 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fans, the, of West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farmer's wife, pretence of threshing, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farmers, propitiation of vermin by, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farnell, Dr. L. R., i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 15 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 68 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fast before eating new fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasting and continence, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Fastnachtsbär</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fat, anointing the body with, from superstitious motives, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatigue of the Horse, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fauns, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feathers of cock mixed with seed-corn, i. 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wren, virtue attributed to, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feet of enemies eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felkin, Dr. R. W., ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fernando Po, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertilising influence of the corn-spirit, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festival before Ploughing (<foreign rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>), i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Cornstalks at Eleusis, 63;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Threshing-floor (<foreign rend='italic'>Haloa</foreign>) at Eleusis, 60 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of winter solstice, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of New Fire, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bladders among the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festivals of new yams, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fewkes, J. Walter, quoted, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fez, orgiastic rites at, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fictitious burials to divert the attention of demons from the real burials, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Field of God,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Field of secret tillage,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fields, miniature, dedicated to spirits, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fife, harvest custom in, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fifty-two years, Aztec cycle of, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fig Dionysus, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; trees, sacred wild, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiji, sacrifice of first-fruits in, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finns, their propitiation of slain bears, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire not given out, i. 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>god of, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by friction of wood, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purification by, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be blown upon, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, i. 311, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Fireless and Homeless,</q> a mythical giant, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire-sticks called <q>husband and wife,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fires extinguished, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firing guns to repel demons, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firmicus Maternus, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First-fruits offered to Demeter, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis, 53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to the sun, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>primitive reluctance to taste, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrament of, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to goddess of agriculture, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>why savages scruple to eat the, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presented to the king, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to the spirits of the dead, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>

<lg>
<l>Fish, sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the first caught, sacrificed, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treated with respect by fishing tribes, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compensated by fishermen, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first of the season, treated ceremoniously, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bones of, not burned, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be broken, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fison, Rev. Lorimer, quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flail, pretence of throttling persons with flail at threshing, i. 149, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flamen Dialis, inaugurates the vintage, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flax-mother, i. 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flesh of human victim eaten, i. 240, 244, 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried in field, 248, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; diet, homoeopathic magic of a, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flies, charms against, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flowery Dionysus, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fly-catcher Zeus, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flying-fish, the first of the season, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fox, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Folk-tales, tongues of wild beasts cut out in, ii. <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foods forbidden to enchanters of crops, i. 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>certain, forbidden to meet in stomach of eater, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fool, one of the mummers on Plough Monday, ii. <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hen, heart of, not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foot, limping on one, i. 232, 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foucart, P., i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foulahs of Senegambia, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox, stuffed, i. 287, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-spirit as, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried from house to house in spring, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Koryak ceremony at killing a, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Esquimau and Aino treatment of dead, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of dead in a, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox's tail, name given to last standing corn, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tongue as amulet, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foxy Dionysus, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, harvest customs in, i. 135, 271, 275, 280, 295, 296;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franche-Comté, harvest customs in, i. 281, 286 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franken (Franconia), harvest customs in, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friction of wood, fire made by, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new fire made by, i. 311, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred fire made by, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frog, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruit-trees bound with Yule straw, i. 301;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dionysus a god of, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presided over by dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruits and roots, wild, ceremonies at gathering the first of the season, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fumigation as mode of cultivating moral virtues, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Funeral of caterpillars, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead snake, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furnivall, J. S., i. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gadbas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galelareese, their burial custom, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galicia, harvest customs in, i. 135, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gall-bladders, the seat of courage, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galloway, harvest customs in, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Game of ball played as a rite, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Games'/>
<l>Games held by harvesters, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quadriennial period of Greek, 77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>octennial period of Greek, 80;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in primitive agriculture, magical significance of, 92 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>played at the sowing festival among the Kayans, 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>played for the good of the crops, 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical, 102;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>athletic, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Eleusinian, i. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 110, 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gander's neck, name given to last standing corn, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaṇeṣa, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaolis, the, i. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardner, Percy, quoted, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gareloch, harvest customs on the, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 218 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garos, the, of Assam, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of the Horse at rice-harvest among the, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gayo-land, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazelle Peninsula, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazelles, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geminus, on the supposed influence of the stars, i. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Generalisations of science inadequate to cover all particular facts, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Generation, male organ of, as emblem of Dionysus, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigy of male organ of, in Thracian ceremony, 26, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genius, Aristotle on men of, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or patron of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Genna</foreign>, taboo, in Assam, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germans, the ancient, i. 129</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, the Corn-mother in, i. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cries of reapers in, 269;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the corn-spirit as an animal in, 271, 277, 279, 296, 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts or demons deceived by dummies, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings to ancestral, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of animals feared, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
<ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disabled by the mutilation of their bodies, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilgit, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gill, W. W., quoted, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilyak procession with bear, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; shaman, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilyaks, the, of Siberia, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their bear-festivals, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ginger cultivated, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girls sacrificed for the crops, i. 237, 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnats, charm against, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat in relation to Dionysus, i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed for human victim, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-spirit as, 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Cripple or Lame, i. 284;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed on harvest-field, 285;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stuffed, 287;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed at sowing, 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Athena, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -formed deities, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; live, torn to pieces in rites of Dionysus, i. 18, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; skin, mask of, i. 26;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by farmer at harvest, 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; skins, mummers clad in, i. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat's neck, name given to last standing corn, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goats torn to pieces by fanatics in Morocco, i. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to wolves, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, the Dying and Reviving, i. 1, 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed in animal form, 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eating the, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods, death and resurrection of, i. 1, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from spirits, 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the likeness of foreigners, 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goldi, bear-festivals of the, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; shaman, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goldsmith, transmigration of thief into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonds, human sacrifices among the, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday, i. 33</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Spirit, the, i. 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goose, to lose the, i. 277 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gorillas, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandmother, name given to last sheaf, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grapes, the last, not to be stript, i. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grasshoppers, charm against, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grave of Dionysus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graves, sacrifices at, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>false, to deceive demons, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Bassam, in Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eleusinian Games, i. 71, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mother, the, name given to the last sheaf, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mysteries of Eleusis, their date, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Sun, title of head chief of the Natchez, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Vigil, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, theory of the transmigration of souls in ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek divinities who died and rose again, i. 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>farmers, their seasons for sowing and reaping, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; months lunar, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; summer rainless, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green Corn Dance, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Festival at Eleusis, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greenlanders, the, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregor, Rev. Walter, i. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory of Tours, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grey, Sir George, quoted, i. 127</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ground, last sheaf not allowed to touch the, i. 158, 159, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guadacanal, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaranis, the, of Paraguay, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Guardian gods</q> of the Hos, i. 234</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guardian-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of family, i. 121</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; spirits of American Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guayaquil, in Ecuador, i. 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaycurus of the Gran Chaco, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guazacualco, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guiana, Indians of British, i. 120, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their animism, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guinea-fowl gives signal for planting, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guns fired to repel demons, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Guré</foreign>, a hobby-horse, ii. <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haddon, Dr. A. C., i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian institutes games at Mantinea, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hag (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>), name given to last corn cut in Wales, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hahn, Theophilus, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haida Indians, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair of slain foes, use made of, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halibut, the first of the season, treatment of, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallowmas, i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halmahera, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Haloa</foreign>, Attic festival, i. 60 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamstring of deer, custom of removing, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamstringing dead animals, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men to disable their ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hand-marks, white, ii. <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hands of enemies eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanover, harvest customs in, i. 133, 135, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare, corn-spirit as, i. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare-skin Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare's tail, name given to last standing corn, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hares not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<lg>
<l>Harran, sacrifices offered by the heathen of, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; legend of Tammuz, i. 258</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, Miss J. E., i. 5 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, 60 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harte, Bret, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartland, E. S., i. 143 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 224 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvest, festival of the dead at the close of, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greece, date of, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -child, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cock, i. 276, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -crown, i. 221, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -customs and spring customs compared, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goat, i. 282, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man, i. 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -Queen, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Harvest-Supper'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -supper, i. 134, 138, 156, 157, 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 297;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacramental character of, 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -woman, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wreath, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvesters, athletic competitions among, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrapt up in corn-stalks, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hawkie</foreign>, i. 146, 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawks, revered by the Aino, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hay, Sir John Drummond, i. 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Head of horse, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hunting, human, i. 240 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>practice of, 256</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Headlam, Walter, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heads shaved, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heart of Dionysus, the sacred, i. 13, 14, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of human victim torn out, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of lion or leopard eaten to make the eater brave, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of water-ousel eaten in order to acquire wisdom and eloquence, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bear eaten to acquire courage, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of serpent eaten to acquire language of animals, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of wolf eaten to acquire courage, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as the seat of intellect, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearts of men sacrificed, i. 236;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of crows, moles, or hawks eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men eaten to acquire their qualities, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heaven-herds among the Zulus, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews forbidden to reap corners of fields and glean, last grapes, i. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heckewelder, Rev. J., quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hedgehog, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemithea, sanctuary of, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hen, heart of, not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hens not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henna, image of Demeter at, i. 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hephaestius, a Greek month, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraeon, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heralds and tongues, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules and Busiris, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules and Lityerses, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Syleus, i. 258</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Zeus, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; surnamed Locust, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermes, tongues of victims assigned to, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrick, i. 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herring, superstitions as to, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hertfordshire, <q>crying the Mare,</q> in, i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hervey Islands, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesiod on time for ploughing, i. 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on time of vintage, 47 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the farmer's calendar, 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis on the Euphrates, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierophant at Eleusis, i. 55, 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Highlands of Scotland, beating the cow's hide in the, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill-Tout, C., ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himerius, on the gift of the corn, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoos, sacrifice of first-fruits among the ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippolytus and Virbius, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; on mysteries of Eleusis, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippopotamus, ceremony after killing a, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippopotamuses, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hockey</foreign> cart, i. 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hodson, T. C., i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoeing, rites at, i. 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>done by women, 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoensbroech, Count von, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoes used by women in agriculture, i. 114, 115, 116, 118, 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoggan, Frances, i. 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hogmanay, the last day of the year, ii. <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness conceived as a dangerous virus, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollis, A. C., ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homer on Demeter, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on loves of Zeus and Demeter, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on gods in likeness of foreigners, 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homeric Greeks, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoeopathic or imitative magic, i. 62, 262, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a flesh diet, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honduras, Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hone, W., quoted, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hop-picking, custom at, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horned Dionysus, i. 12, 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse, <q>seeing the Horse,</q> i. 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Cross of the Horse,</q> 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>fatigue of the Horse,</q> 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to Mars at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony of the, at rice-harvest among the Garos, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Virbius, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -headed Demeter of Phigalia, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or mare, corn-spirit as, i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Horse-Races'/>
<l>Horse-races, i. 71, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at harvest, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse's head, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horses, Lycurgus torn to pieces by, i. 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excluded from Arician grove, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excluded from sanctuaries, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, eye of, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hos of Togoland, the, i. 130, 234, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a tribe of Ewe negroes, i. 115, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Bengal, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hottentots, the, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huahine, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huichol Indians, the, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huitzilopochtli, a Mexican god, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human beings torn to pieces in rites of Dionysus, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human sacrifices for crops, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered by ancient Egyptians, 259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Mexico, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; victims, substitutes for, i. 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treated as divine, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunters, propitiation of wild animals by, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of grisly bears, chastity observed by, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunting the wren, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurons, the, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huts, miniature, for ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huzuls, the, of the Carpathians, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyaenas, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyes Attes, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, Homeric, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 70</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ialysus in Rhodes, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iasion and Demeter, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibans (Sea Dyaks) of Sarawak, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iberians, the, i. 129</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Icarius and Erigone, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ichneumon, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ida Batara, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idah, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideler, L., i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igaras of the Niger, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igbiras, the, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Igorrots of the Philippines, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Image of god made of dough and eaten sacramentally, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of snake carried about, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Images'/>
<l>Images of ancestors, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of animals sacrificed instead of the animals, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vicarious use of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of gods, suggested origin of, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of vermin made as a protection against them, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Effigies'>Effigies</ref>, <ref target='Index-Puppets'>Puppets</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imitation of spirits, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immortality, hope of, associated with Eleusinian mysteries, i. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of animals, savage faith in the, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immortality of soul revealed in mysteries of Dionysus, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Inachi</hi>, an offering of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Inao</foreign>, sacred wands of the Aino, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inari, Japanese rice-god, i. 297</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incantations for growth of crops, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incas, the, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, the last sheaf of corn in, 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doctrine of the transmigration of souls in ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indian Archipelago, the, i. 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians of British Columbia, their cannibal orgies, i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of South America, women's agricultural work among the, 119 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indonesian ideas of rice-soul, i. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indra, Indian god, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingiald, son of King Aunund, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inoculation with moral and other virtues, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inscription, Eleusinian, dealing with first-fruits, i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercalation in Greek calendar, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Invulnerability, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iowa Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irayas, the, of Luzon, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, hunting the wren in, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron axe, use of, forbidden, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iroquois, their sacrifice of a white dog, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Isilimela</hi>, the Pleiades, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, i. 262;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dirge of, 215;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Tithorea, festivals of, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to cows, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Islay, harvest customs in, i. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isle de France, harvest customs in, i. 221, 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isle of Man, hunting the wren in the, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isocrates, on Demeter's gift of the corn, i. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isowa or Aïsawa, order of saints in Morocco, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Israelites, their brazen serpent, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isthmian games, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, vintage custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivy Girl, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jabme-Aimo, the abode of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackal, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackal's heart not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacob, the wrestling of, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Edessa, 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jaguars eaten to inspire courage, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ja-luo, the, Nilotic negroes, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jankari, a god, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japan, rice-god in, i. 297</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japanese deities of the Sun, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Jatakas</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Java, use of winnowing-basket in, i. 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at rice-harvest in, 199 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jawbones of slain beasts propitiated by hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jebel-Nuba, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish high priest, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, their attitude to the pig, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ablutions, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jochelson, W., ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, Dr. Samuel, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jukos, the, of Nigeria, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Julbuck</foreign> in Scandinavia, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jumping over a woman, ceremony of, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter, lamb sacrificed to, at vintage, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kachins, the, of Upper Burma, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kai, the, of German New Guinea, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 313, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in transmigration, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaimani Bay, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalamantans of Borneo, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalmucks, their consecration of a white ram, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamilaroi, the, of New South Wales, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial custom of the, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatka, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamtchatkans, the, i. 315, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their propitiation of slain animals, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kamui</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kandhs or Khonds. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Khonds'>Khonds</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kangean archipelago, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kansas Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karels of Finland, the, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karens of Burma, i. 10;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies to secure the rice-soul, 189 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karo-Bataks of Sumatra, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karoks of California, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kashim</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaua Indians, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kavirondo, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Kayans'/>
<l>Kayans or Bahaus, the, of central Borneo, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 107, 109, 111, 234, 314, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies in connexion with rice, 184 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom as to eating deer, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in transmigration, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Mahakam river, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Mendalam river, i. 97, 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kei Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kekchis of Guatemala, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kelah</foreign>, soul, i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kemping</foreign>, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kent, harvest custom in, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenyahs, the, of Borneo, i. 314</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Key of the field, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khön-ma, a Tibetan goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Khonds'/>
<l>Khonds or Kandhs, human sacrifices for crops among the, i. 245 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kid, surname of Dionysus, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kikuyu, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Killing a god in the form of an animal, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>two types of the custom of, ii. <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the corn-spirit, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the divine animal, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kimbunda, the, of West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, title of Carnival mummer, i. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eats of new fruits before his people, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-fruits presented to the, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>so called, at Carcassone, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Calf, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the harvesters, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Rice, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King's son sacrificed for his father, i. 13, 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings, trace of custom of slaying them annually, i. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>turned at death into lions, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings' wives turned at death into leopards, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingsmill Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kinross, harvest custom in, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kinship of men with crocodiles, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men with tigers, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Kirn'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kirn</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>kern</foreign>, last corn cut, i. 151, 152 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name of the harvest-supper, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -baby, i. 151, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -doll, i. 151, 153, 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -supper, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiwaii, i. 106</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiziba, district of Central Africa, i. 118, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Klöppel</foreign> (mallet), at threshing, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kobeua Indians, the, i. 111, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kochs of Assam, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kon-Meney, a tribe of Cochin China, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Koragia</foreign> at Mantinea, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Kore</foreign>, title of Persephone, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koryak, their ceremonies at killing bears and wolves, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies at the slaughter of whales, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their treatment of a slain fox, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kothluwalawa, a sacred lake, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krooben, a malevolent spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kruyt, A. C., i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kshetrpal, a Himalayan deity, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kudulu, a hill tribe of India, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kuker</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Kukerica</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κυκεών, i. 161 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kukis, the, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kull Gossaih, an Indian goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kwakiutl Indians, i. 20, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Ciotat, near Marseilles, hunting the wren at, ii. <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ladakh, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagos, human sacrifice at, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lake-dwellers of Europe, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamb killed sacramentally, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<lg>
<l>Lame, woman who pretends to be, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Goat, the, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamentations, pretended, for insects which destroy the crops, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lampsacus, coin of, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land cleared for cultivation by men, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landowners, sacrifices offered to spirits of former, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lang, Andrew, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Language of animals acquired by eating serpent's flesh, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of birds, how learned, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanuvium, sacred serpent at, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laos, province of Siam, i. 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laphystian Zeus, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lapps, the, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their treatment of slain bears, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latuka, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Laws of Manu</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaf-clad dancers, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaps, high and long, i. 98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to make the crops grow tall, ii. <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Learchus, son of Athamas, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leeches, charm against, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legends told as charms, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenaeon, a Greek month, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lengua Indians of Paraguay, i. 309;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Gran Chaco, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenormant, François, i. 40 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonard, Major A. G., ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopard's blood drunk, or its flesh or heart eaten to make the eater brave, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopards, men inspired by, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revered, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies observed after the slaughter of, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lepers sacrificed, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leprosy caused by eating a sacred animal, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lesbos, harvest custom in, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letts, swinging among the, i. 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their sacrifices to wolves, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lhoosai, the, i. 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lhota Naga, the, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libanius, on human life before Demeter, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libations of beer, ii. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liber, Father, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman sacrifice of new wine to, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>License, periods of, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightning, eating flesh of bullock that has been struck by, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of men, animals, and houses that have been struck by, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Liknites</foreign>, epithet of Dionysus, i. 5, 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lillooet Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limping on one foot, i. 232, 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindus in Rhodes, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linus or Ailinus, i. 216, 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 263, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion-chief, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion's fat, unguent of, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; flesh or heart eaten to make eater brave, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lions, men inspired by, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respected, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead chiefs in, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lir majoran, god of husbandry, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lithuania, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest customs in, i. 133, 145, 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at threshing in, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>old Lithuanian ceremonies at eating the new corn, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Little Deer, chief of the deer tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Wood-woman, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lityerses, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to Attis, 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liver of deer eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dog eaten to acquire bravery, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of serpent eaten to acquire language of animals, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as the seat of the soul, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as the seat of valour, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of brave men eaten, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bear, used as medicine, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='ru' rend='italic'>Ljeschie</foreign>, Russian wood-spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loaf made of corn of last sheaf, i. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loaves in shape of a boar, i. 300;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in human shape, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lobeck, Chr. A., ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lochaber, harvest customs in, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locust Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hercules, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locusts, superstitious precautions against, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombok, rice-spirit in, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lothringen (Lorraine), harvest customs in, i. 223, 273, 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loucheux-Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louisiana, festival of new corn in, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indians of, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lous, a Macedonian month, i. 258, 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, old scholium on, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Lumi lali</foreign>, consecrated rice-field, i. 93, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lunar calendar corrected by observation of the Pleiades, i. 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; months observed by savages, i. 117, 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; months of Greek calendar, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and solar time, attempts to harmonise, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luritcha tribe of Australia, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luzon, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycosura, in Arcadia, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctuary of the two goddesses at, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<lg>
<l>Lycurgus, a Thracian king, his death, i. 24, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mabuaig, i. 106, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M'Carthy, Sir Charles, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonald, Rev. James, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maclagan, Dr. R. C., i. 165, 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McClintock, Walter, i. 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macpherson, Major S. C., i. 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McTaggart, Dr. J. McT. Ellis, ii. <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madagascar, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>crocodiles respected in, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in transmigration among the tribes of, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madder-harvest, Dutch custom at, i. 231, 235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madonna, effigies of, sold and eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maggots eaten as an initiatory rite, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magic dwindles into divination, i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sympathetic, 1, 11, 102, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>homoeopathic or imitative, i. 10, 62, 262, 267, 331, 333, 334;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a flesh diet, 138 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magical changes of shape, i. 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; significance of games in primitive agriculture, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnesia on the Maeander, i. 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of bull at, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magpies' nests, custom of robbing the, ii. <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magyar tale, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahakam River, i. 98, 99 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 186, 187, 314</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mai Darat, the, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Maiden'/>
<l>Maiden, name given to last corn cut, i. 150, 153, 155 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Feast at end of harvest, i. 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maidenhead, name of last standing corn, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Maidhdean-buain</hi>, i. 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maize cultivated in Africa, i. 114, 115, 119, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in South America, 122, 124;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in Assam, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>American personification of, 171 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in Burma, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be dependent on the Pleiades, 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goddess, Mexican, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makalaka, the, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makanga, the, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malagasy, the, venerate crocodiles, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malas, the, a caste of pariahs, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malay Peninsula, the Rice-mother in the, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malays of Patani Bay, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Male organ, effigy of, in rites of Dionysus, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigy of, in Thracian ceremony, 26, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malko-Tirnovsko, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamilian tower, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandans, the, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandeling, a district of Sumatra, i. 197, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maneros, i. 215, 258, 259, 261, 263, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mang-Shen, god of agriculture, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mango tree, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mania, the Mother or Grandmother of Ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Maniae</hi>, a kind of loaf, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manii at Aricia, many, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manioc cultivated in Africa, i. 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in South America, 120 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mannewars, the, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mannhardt, W., i. 11, 131, 132, 135, 138, 204, 217 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 218 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 222, 258, 292, 294, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manslayers taste the blood of their victims, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mantinea, sanctuary of Demeter at, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>games in honour of Antinous at, 80, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Manu, Laws of</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manure, ashes used as, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Many Manii at Aricia, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maoris, the, i. 313, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maraves, the, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>March, the first of, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mare in foal, last sheaf of corn given to, i. 160, 162, 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or horse, corn-spirit as, i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marimos, human sacrifices among the, i. 240, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariner, W., quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marno, E., ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, mock, at Carnival masquerade, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Queen of Athens to Dionysus, 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, of Zeus and Demeter in Eleusinian mysteries, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mice, ii. <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mars, red-haired men sacrificed to the planet, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>horse sacrificed to, at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masai, the, i. 317, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masked dances, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 111, 186, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ritual, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masks worn by Egyptian kings, i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by women, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by mummers at Carnival, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maskers in Thrace at Carnival, i. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maspero, Sir G., i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masquerade at sowing festival, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 98, 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Master of the Fish, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Life, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matabelé, the, i. 115, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their festival of new fruits, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matse tribe of Ewe negroes, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthes, Dr. B. F., ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mausolus, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<lg>
<l>Mawu Sodza, a Ewe goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May, J. D., ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May, the first of, ii. <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maypole, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Meal and ale,</q> i. 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meat and milk, dietary rules as to, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecklenburg, harvest customs in, i. 273, 274, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medea and Aeson, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medicine-man, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dance of, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medium inspired by crocodile spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mediums inspired by spirits of lions, leopards, and serpents, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medontids, the, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Megara</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meilichios, epithet of Dionysus, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melancholy, characteristic of men of genius, ii. <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanesians, their observation of the Pleiades, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mell'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mell</foreign>, last corn cut, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -doll, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sheaf, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -supper, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men, parts of, eaten to acquire their qualities, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disguised as animals, processions of, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendalam River, i. 97, 98, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menstruous women, disability of, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meriah, the human victim among the Khonds, i. 245, 246, 249, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metageitnion, an Attic month, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Metropolis of the Corn,</q> i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexican custom of eating a man as an embodiment of a god, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs at maize-harvest, i. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; human sacrifices, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacraments, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyer, Prof. E., i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mhaighdean-Bhuana</foreign> (or <foreign rend='italic'>Maighdean-Buana</foreign>), i. 156, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miamis, the, i. 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mice'/>
<l>Mice, the genius of, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitious precautions taken by farmers against, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstition as to white, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ravages on the crops, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midas, King of Phrygia, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Middleton, J. H., i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midsummer solstice, rainmaking ceremony performed at the, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mildew worshipped by the Romans, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milk, taboos referring to, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary abstinence from, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to snakes, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milk and meat (flesh), dietary rules as to, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of pig, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, Tammuz, ground in a, i. 258</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Millet cultivated in Africa, i. 115, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in Assam, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in New Guinea, 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton, quoted, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minahassa, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minangkabauers of Sumatra, i. 191, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miniature fields dedicated to spirits, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minnetaree Indians, i. 204, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minotaur, the, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miris of Assam, the, i. 123, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mirzapur, remedy for locusts in, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mistress, sanctuary of the, at Lycosura, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithraic sacrifice of bull, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mnevis, sacred bull, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moab, Arabs of, i. 138</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mock battle, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sham-Fight'>Sham Fight</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mocobis, the, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moffat, R., i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monbuttoo, the, of Central Africa, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Mondard</foreign>, the great, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongolian peoples, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monkeys sacred at Fishtown, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Months, lunar, observed by savages, i. 117, 125;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Greek calendar, 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moon, reckoning by the, i. 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human victims sacrificed to, 261;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pigs sacrificed to the, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mooney, J., quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mopane country, South Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravia, harvest custom in, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan, L. H., ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morning Star, the, i. 238, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morocco, order of saints in, i. 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Barley Bride in, 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosquito Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mother, the Great, name given to the last sheaf, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Maize, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Rice, 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -corn, name given to last sheaf threshed, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cotton, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Earth, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sheaf, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulton, Professor J. H., i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 131 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mountains, offerings to the, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourning, pretended, for insects that destroy the crops, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouse Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Mice'>Mice</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouth of dead fox tied up, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mpongwe, the, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muganda (singular of Baganda, plural), ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mukasa, god of the Baganda, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<lg>
<l>Mull, harvest custom in, i. 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mulungu</foreign>, spirits of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, Miss Margaret A., i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, Sir James, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muskoghees, the, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mutilation of dead men intended to disable their ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ox, magical equivalent to mutilation of enemy, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Muzimos</foreign>, spirits of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myconus, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myres, Professor J. L., i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysteries at Mantinea, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Eleusinian, i. 35, 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 111, 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Great, their date, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Eumolpus, 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with belief in immortality, 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Dionysus, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Greek, i. 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nagas of Assam, their burial custom, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in transmigration, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahals, the, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namaquas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nandi, the, i. 117, 317, ii. <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nanga</foreign>, sacred enclosure in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naples protected against flies and grasshoppers, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narrative spells, i. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natchez Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their festival of new corn, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural timekeepers, i. 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nauras Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navel-string, term applied to last handful of corn, i. 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neck, crying the, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the corn-spirit, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neil, R. A., ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nemean games, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nets treated as living beings, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New corn, eaten sacramentally, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fire, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fruits, ceremonies at eating, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; potatoes, how eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rice, ceremonies at eating the, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; vessels used for new fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; yams, ceremonies at eating, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of the, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Tonga, festival of the, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Britain, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Caledonia, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony at eating first yams in, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, i. 313, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>German, i. 99, 103, 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dutch, 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Hebrides, i. 313, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Zealand, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Year festival of the Kayans, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 98, 99;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dated by the Pleiades, 116, 310, 312, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Year's Day, i. 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eve of, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niam-Niam, the, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nias, i. 315, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicaragua, festivals in, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicolson, A., i. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W., i. 93, 94 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 95, 96, 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 98, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niger Delta, burial custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nilsson, Professor M. P., i. 58 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nine, the number, in ritual, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nisan, a Jewish month, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nishga Indians, the, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nonnus, on death of Dionysus, i. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nootka Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Normandy, harvest customs in, i. 226, 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North American Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their theory of the lower animals, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumberland, harvest customs in, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norway, harvest customs in, i. 132, 223, 225, 280, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nubas, the, of Jebel-Nuba, ii. <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuehr, the, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyanja-speaking tribes, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyanza, Lake Victoria, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyikplă, a negro rain-god, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oath of women by the Pleiades, i. 311</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oaths accompanied by eating a sacred substance, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oats-bride, i. 162, 163, 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cow, i. 289, 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -fool, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goat, i. 270, 282, 283, 286, 287;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mummer called the, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -king, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man, i. 163, 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -queen, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sow, i. 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stallion, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, i. 273, 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -woman, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obscene songs sung by women on special occasions, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Octennial cycle in Greek calendar, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; period of Greek games, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tenure of kingship, i. 82, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>October horse, at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oesel, island of, i. 298, 302, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ogun, a war-god, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oil, human victim anointed with, i. 246, 247;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holy, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ointment, magical, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ojibway Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their treatment of slain bears, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>

<lg>
<l>Okanaken Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olachen fish, ceremonies at catching the first of the season, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old animal, bone of, eaten to make eater old, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Barley-woman, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Calabar, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Corn-woman at threshing, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Man, name given to the last sheaf, i. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at threshing, 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Potato Woman, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Rye-woman, i. 139, 140, 145, 223, 224, 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Wheat-woman, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>), name given to last corn cut, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Witch, burning the, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Woman, name given to last sheaf, i. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 147, 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cherokee personification of corn, 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Woman who Never Dies, i. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Women as representatives of the Corn-goddess, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oloh Ngadju, the, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympia, Pelops at, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympiads, beginning of reckoning by, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympic games, i. 80, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omagua Indians of Brazil, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omaha Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omambos, the, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omen, beasts and birds of, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Omuongo</foreign> tree, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onitsha, on the Niger, ii. <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>funeral custom at, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opium, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oraons, human sacrifices among the, i. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Bengal, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Organs of generation, male and female, cakes in shape of, i. 62;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigies of male, 12, 26, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origin of agriculture, i. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of astronomy, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orinoco, Indians of the, i. 124, 310, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orion, the constellation, i. 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orion's belt, i. 313, 315, 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sword, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orotchis, bear-festivals of the, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osculati, G., ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, i. 214, 215, 259 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to Dionysus, 3, 32;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices at grave of, 260;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>black and green, 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>key to mysteries of, 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the pig, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to sacred bulls, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>false graves of, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his missing member, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostiaks, their ceremonies at killing bears, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostrich, ghost of, deceived, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otawa Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otawa totem clans, ii. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otter's head, Aino custom as to eating, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otters, their bones not allowed to be gnawed by dogs, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ounce, ceremony at killing an, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovambo, the, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of the dead, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ox, corn-spirit as, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed on harvest field, 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaughtered at threshing, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed at the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Bouphonia</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as representative of the corn-spirit, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effigy of, broken as a spring ceremony in China, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bechuana sacrifice of a black, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to boa-constrictor, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stall (Bucolium) at Athens, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -yoked Ploughing at Athens, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxen used in ploughing, i. 129 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pains in back at reaping, i. 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palenques, the, of South America, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, wild boars in, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panathenaic games at Athens, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Panes</foreign>, a bird-feast, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panopeus, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pans in relation to goats, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papuans, the, i. 123, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in the transmigration of souls, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Paradoxurus</foreign>, souls of dead in various species of, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pardon of animal asked before killing it, ii. <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parian chronicler, i. 70</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris protected against dormice and serpents, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parjas, the, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parrots, assimilation of men to, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Partridge, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pasiphae and the Minotaur, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pastoral stage of society, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tribes, animal sacraments among, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patani Bay, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pawnees, human sacrifices among the, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peacock as a totem, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of sinner into, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pea-mother, i. 132, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peas-cow, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -pug, i. 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelew Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islands, burial custom in the, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelops at Olympia, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his restoration to life, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pembrokeshire, harvest customs in, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cutting <q>the neck</q> in, 267;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hunting the wren in, ii. 320</l>
</lg>

<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>

<lg>
<l>Pentheus, death of, i. 24, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pergamus, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Permanence of simpler forms of religion, ii. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persephone, mother of Zagreus by Zeus, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rape of, 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a personification of the corn, 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in art, 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the descent of, 46, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with the ripe ears of corn, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greek art, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Demeter, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Pluto, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Personification of corn as mother and daughter, i. 130, 207 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perthshire, harvest customs in, i. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peru, Indians of, i. 120, 122, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of the Pleiades, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peruvians, their customs as to Mother of Maize, etc., i. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pessinus, i. 255</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phigalia, horse-headed Demeter of, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippine Islands, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philistines, their charm against mice, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philochorus, on date of <hi rend='italic'>Haloa</hi>, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phlius, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phoenicia, song of Linus in, i. 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, Lityerses in, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Phyllanthus emblica</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piaroas Indians of the Orinoco, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig, corn-spirit as, i. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to Demeter, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten in Crete, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Attis, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -meat forbidden to women at sowing seed, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig's flesh not eaten by field labourers, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigeons, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pigs, sacrifice of, i. 74, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be eaten by enchanters of crops, 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pilae,</foreign> human effigies, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pindar, old scholiast on, i. 71, 74, 77, 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on rebirth, 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pine-tree, sacred to Dionysus, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piros Indians of Peru, ii. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pirua,</foreign> granary of maize, i. 171 sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plaiting the last standing corn before cutting it, i. 142, 144, 153, 154, 157, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plane-tree, Dionysus in, i. 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Planets, human victims sacrificed to, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plants thought to be animated by spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plataea, Eleutherian games at, i. 80, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato and the doctrine of transmigration, ii. <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Playfair, Major A., ii. <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pleiades, autumnal setting of, i. 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>morning rising of, the signal for reaping in Greece, 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in primitive calendars, 116, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>associated with the rainy season, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, on the setting of the Pleiades, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plough in relation to Dionysus, i. 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in primitive agriculture, 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Monday, i. 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>English celebration of, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughing at Carnival, ceremony of, i. 28, 29, 331, 332, 334;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Athens, sacred ceremony of, 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greece, season of, 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with oxen, 129 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chinese ceremony of, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughings, three a year, i. 53 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sacred, in Attica, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughmen and plough-horses, the Yule Boar given to, i. 301, 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, on a Roman rite, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on immortality, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on mourning festival of Demeter, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Apis, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pluto called Subterranean Zeus, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Persephone, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rude originals of, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutus, i. 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poland, harvest customs in, i. 144, 145, 148, 150, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollution of death, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonial, of girl at puberty, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesia, observation of the Pleiades in, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesians, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomegranates sprung from blood of Dionysus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Po-nagar, goddess of agriculture, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pondos, the, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pongal feast, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pongol, a Hindoo festival, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontiffs regulate Roman calendar, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poor Old Woman, corn left on field for, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poppies as symbols of Demeter, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poppy, the, cultivated for opium, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porcupine, a Bechuana totem, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respected by some Indians, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of sinner into, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pork'/>
<l>Pork forbidden to enchanters of crops, i. 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten by field labourers, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for not eating, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry, on the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Bouphonia</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poseidon, first-fruits sacrificed to, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poso, in Celebes, i. 236, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potato-dog, i. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, i. 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potawatomi Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, the Place of, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<lg>
<l>Prayer and spell, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayers to the spirits of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>addressed to dead animals, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to shark-idol, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preachers to fish, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pretence made by reapers of mowing down visitors to the harvest-field, i. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest, chief acting as, ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests, first-fruits belong to, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Tetzcatlipoca, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of shark-idols, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primitive ritual, marks of, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proarcturia, a Greek festival, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Processions with sacred animals, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of men disguised as animals, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proclus on Dionysus, i. 13</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>, a Greek festival of Demeter, i. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 60, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecy, spirit of, acquired by eating certain food, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propitiation of wild animals by hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of vermin by farmers, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussia, harvest customs in, i. 136, 137, 139, 150 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 209, 219, 280, 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 288, 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussians, the old, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their custom at sowing, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pruyssenaere, E. de, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psylli, a Snake clan, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puberty, ceremonial pollution of girl at, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pueblo Indians, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pul</foreign>, an astrologer, i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pulse cultivated in Bengal, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Puplem</foreign>, general council, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Puppet'/>
<l>Puppet made out of last sheaf, i. 137, 138, 231;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at threshing, 148, 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at harvest, 150;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representing the corn-spirit, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Puppets'/>
<l>Puppets of rushes thrown into the Tiber, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purest person cuts the last corn, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification, ceremonies of, i. 9;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>before partaking of new fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for slaughter of a serpent, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by fire, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>before eating the first salmon, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyanepsia, an Attic festival, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyanepsion, an Attic month, i. 46, 52, 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, his reincarnations, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his doctrine of transmigration, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythian games, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Python clan, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quadriennial period of Greek games, i. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quail, cry of, i. 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-spirit as, 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen of Athens married to Dionysus, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Corn-ears, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name given to last sheaf, 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Charlotte Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quetzalcoatl, a Mexican god, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quiches, the, of Central America, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quinoa-mother, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quixos Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Race of reapers to last sheaf, i. 291;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on harvest-field, 137</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Races at harvest, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in connexion with agriculture, 98.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Horse-Races'>Horse-races</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rain, prayer for, at Eleusis, i. 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be given by the spirits of dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -charm, i. 134, 170, 250, 252, 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rainless Greek summer, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rains, autumnal, in Greece, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajamahall, in Bengal, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rakelimalaza, a Malagasy god, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ram sacrificed to Ammon, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killing the sacred, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecration of a white, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ram's skull, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rams' horns, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rape of Persephone, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rarian Plain at Eleusis, i. 36, 70, 74, 108, 234, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raspberries, wild, ceremony at gathering the first, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rat, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rats, superstitious precautions of farmers against, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rattles in myth and ritual of Dionysus, i. 13, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rattlesnakes respected by the North American Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ravens respected by Sudanese negroes, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reapers, contests between, i. 136, 140, 141, 142, 144, 152, 153 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 219, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blindfolded, 144, 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special words used by, 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretend to mow down visitors to harvest-field, 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cries of, 263 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>race of, to last corn, 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reaping, Indonesian mode of, i. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contests in, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pains in back at, 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rebirth of the dead, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red and black, faces of bear-hunters painted, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and white, leopard-hunters painted, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and yellow, faces of human victims painted, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<lg>
<l>Red-haired men sacrificed, i. 260, 261, 263, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; puppies sacrificed, i. 261, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reef Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reincarnation of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reindeer, dogs not allowed to gnaw the leg-bones of, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repulsion and attraction, forces of, ii. <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rest for three days, compulsory, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection of the gods, i. 1, 12, 14, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of fish, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bones of men preserved for the, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in popular tales, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revolving image, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ribald jests at mysteries, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice cultivated in Assam, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in New Guinea, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of, 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treated as a woman, 183 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>King of the, 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>(paddy), Father and Mother of the, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirituous liquor distilled from, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the new, ceremonies at eating the, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bride, i. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bridegroom, i. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -child, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -fields, sacred, among the Kayans, i. 93, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goddess, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -harvest, ceremony of the Horse at, ii. <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 183 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 197 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the East Indies, 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -soul as bird, i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>caught or detained, 184 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riddles asked at harvest, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ridgeway, Professor W., i. 29 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 65, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ring, competition for, i. 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rites of Plough Monday, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritual, primitive, marks of, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical or propitiatory, 169, 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Dionysus, i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robbers, charm used by, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rodents, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rohde, E., i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rollo, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman calendar, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; deities of the corn, i. 210 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifices to Ceres and Liber, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans worship mildew, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roof, spirits enter through the, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remains of slain bear let down through the, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roots and seeds, wild, collected by women, i. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscher, W. H., ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscoe, Rev. John, i. 240 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rotation of crops, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rouse, Dr. W. H. D., i. 208 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rügen, harvest customs in, i. 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Running, contests in, i. 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rush-cutter, i. 230 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russia, harvest customs in, i. 146, 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russian wood-spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rye-beggar, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -boar, i. 298, 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bride, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goat, i. 282, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 132, 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -pug, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sow, i. 270, 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, i. 270, 271, 272, 273, 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -woman, i. 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Old, 133</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saa, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabarios, a Lithuanian festival, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabazius, i. 2 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbaths, agricultural, i. 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sable-hunters, rules observed by, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacaea, a Babylonian festival, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrament of eating a god, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of swine's flesh, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemic, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>types of animal, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of first-fruits, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>combined with a sacrifice of them, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacramental bread, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; character of harvest supper, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; eating of corn-spirit in animal form, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacraments among pastoral tribes, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacred Marriage at Eleusis, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ploughings in Attica, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; things deemed dangerous, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Women, i. 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice not to be touched, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of first-fruits, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, human, for the crops, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human, in Mexico, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to nets, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to wolves, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to a toad, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadana, rice-bridegroom, i. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahagun, B. de, i. 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Catherine's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. George's Eve, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Kilda, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Mary, Isle of, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Matthew's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Nicholas, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Paul on immortality, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Day, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Stephen's Day, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakalava, the, of Madagascar, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sale, nominal, of children, i. 8</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salish Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmon, resurrection of, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at catching the first salmon of the season, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<lg>
<l>Salt, abstinence from, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of, forbidden, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salzburg, harvest custom in, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoa, ii. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoans, their sacrifices of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoyed, custom after killing a reindeer, ii. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>San Juan Capistrano, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indians of, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctity of the corn, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandwich Islands, belief in transmigration among natives of the, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saning Sari, rice-goddess, i. 191, 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sappho, i. 216</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturnalia, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satyrs in relation to goats, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, the, not illogical, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; faith in the immortality of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxo Grammaticus, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxons of Transylvania, harvest custom of the, i. 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their customs at sowing, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxony, harvest customs in, i. 134, 137, 149, 163, 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scandinavian custom of the Yule Boar, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scarification as a religious rite, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from superstitious motives, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scheube, Dr. B., ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schleswig, harvest customs in, i. 230, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schrenck, L. von, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schweinfurth, G., ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Science, generalisations of, inadequate to cover all particulars, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scirophorion, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scorpions, charm against, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, harvest customs in, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scratching as a religious rite, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scurrilities exchanged between vine-dressers and passers-by, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scurrilous language at mysteries, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythians, set store on heads of enemies, i. 256 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea beasts, Esquimau rules as to eating, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their bladders restored to the sea by the Esquimaux, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mammals, their mythical origin, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seals, care taken of the bladders and bones of, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sedna, an Esquimau goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seed sown by women, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sown by children, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seed-corn, i. 135, 205, 278, 301, 304, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seed-rice, i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seeds and roots, wild, collected by women, i. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seler, Professor E., i. 175</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seligmann, Dr. C. G., ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sĕmangat</foreign>, i. 181, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semele, mother of Dionysus, i. 14, 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seminole Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senegambia, Python clan in, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Serpent'/>
<l>Serpent, killing the sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies performed after killing a, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpent's flesh eaten to learn the language of animals, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpents, offerings to, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men inspired by, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charms against, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of the dead in, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Snake'>Snake</ref>, <ref target='Index-Snakes'>Snakes</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Set or Typhon, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Typhon'>Typhon</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seven, the number, in ritual, i. 190, 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; months' child, i. 26, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sham-Fight'/>
<l>Sham fight, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fights in connexion with agriculture, i. 98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>(mimic battles) before going forth to war, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; graves and corpses to deceive demons, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shans of Indo-China, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shape, magical changes of shape, i. 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sharks, ghosts in, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheaf, the last, the Corn-mother in, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thresher tied up in, 134, 147, 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drenched with water, 134, 137, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given to cattle, 134, 155, 158, 161, 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stones fastened to, 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 138, 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called the Old Woman or Old Man, 136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-spirit caught in, 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvester tied up in, 139, 145, 221, 222;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called the <foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign> (Old Wife), 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representative of the corn-spirit, 168, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Lower Burma, i. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>person identified with, 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in India, 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 234 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>race of reapers to, 291.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Clyack'><hi rend='italic'>Clyack</hi></ref>, <ref target='Index-Kirn'><hi rend='italic'>Kirn</hi></ref>, <ref target='Index-Mell'><hi rend='italic'>Mell</hi></ref>, <ref target='Index-Maiden'>Maiden</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ghosts of, dreaded, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep-skin, fumigation with, ii. <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep-skins, candidates at initiation seated on, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shells of eggs preserved, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shifting cultivation, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shoulder-blade, divination by, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shropshire, <q>the neck</q> in, i. 268;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>crying the Mare</q> in, 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shrove Tuesday, i. 300, ii. <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shrovetide Bear, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shumpaoli, an African god, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shuswap Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siam, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<lg>
<l>Sicilians, Demeter's gift of corn to the, i. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, worship of Demeter and Persephone in, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickles thrown at last standing corn, i. 136, 142, 144, 153, 154, 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickness cured or prevented by effigies, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicyon, wolves at, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sierra Leone, i. 317</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sieves, children at birth placed in, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigurd and the dragon, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silence enforced during absence of fisher, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silenuses, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silesia, harvest customs in, i. 136, 138, 139, 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 231, 233, 273, 277, 281, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvanus, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simbang, village in German New Guinea, ii. <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Similkameen Indians, the, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinew of the thigh, customs and myths as to, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinews of dead men cut to disable their ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sing Bonga, a sun god, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Singleton, Miss A. H., ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sioux girl, sacrifice of, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skeat, W. W., i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skin of sacrificed animal, uses of, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -disease caused by eating a sacred animal, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skins of sacrificed animals stuffed, 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skipping-rope, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skull, drinking out of a human, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skulls, human, as protection against powers of evil, i. 241;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Place of, 243;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of ancestors in their, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ancestors, offerings set beside, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bears worshipped, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of enemies destroyed, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sky God, the, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god Zeus, i. 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skye, harvest custom in, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaves of the Earth Gods, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavonic peoples, harvest customs among, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slayers of leopards, rules of diet observed by, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slow-footed animals not eaten by some savage tribes, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eaten by preference by the Bushmen, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Small-pox, cure for, i. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smearing the body as a means of imparting certain qualities, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of blood on worshippers a mode of communion with the deity, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smintheus Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Professor, G. C., ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W. Robertson, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smoking as a means of inducing state of ecstasy, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in honour of slain bears, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; first tobacco of season, ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Snake'/>
<l>Snake worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, eaten to acquire supernatural knowledge, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Serpent'>Serpent</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bite, inoculation against, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -priest, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snake's tongue as amulet, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Snakes'/>
<l>Snakes respected by the North American Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred at Whydah, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead princes in, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society, stratification of religion according to types of, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islanders, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solar and lunar time, attempts to harmonise, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solomon Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief in the transmigration of souls in the, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstice, the midsummer, rain-making ceremony at the, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the summer, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the winter, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstices observed, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somerville, Professor W., i. 193 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Songish or Lkungen tribe of Vancouver Island, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Songs of the corn-reapers, i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophocles, his play <hi rend='italic'>Triptolemus</hi>, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul thought to be seated in the liver, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of rice, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eating the, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stuff in the East Indies, i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Souls, immortal, attributed by savages, to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the human dead in caterpillars, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of human, into animals, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South American Indians, women's agricultural work among the, i. 120 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southey, R., quoted, i. 122, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowing, festival of Demeter at, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice to Demeter at, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Festival of the, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time of, determined by observation of the sun, 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goat killed at, 288;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs observed by Saxons of Transylvania at, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and planting, time of, determined by the appearance of the Pleiades, i. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>

<lg>
<l>Sowing in Greece, time for, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of the Kayans, i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seed to make children grow, i. 11</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowing the seed done by women, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>done by children, 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spades and hoes, human victim killed with, i. 239, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparrows, charm to keep them from the corn, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spearing taro stalks, as a charm, i. 102, 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spell and prayer, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spells for growth of crops, i. 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>narrative, 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imperative, 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, Herbert, his theory of the material universe compared to that of Empedocles, ii. <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spiders, ceremony at killing, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spieth, J., ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spindle used in ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spinning acorns or figs, i. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; tops, i. 95, 97, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit of Beans, Iroquois, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Corn, Iroquois, i. 177. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Corn-Spirit'>Corn-spirit</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Squashes, Iroquois, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirits, evil, averted from children, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the dead supposed to influence the crops, 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinguished from gods, 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imitation of, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spittle, virtue of, i. 247, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sports, athletic, at harvest, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Contests'>Contests</ref>, <ref target='Index-Games'>Games</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spring, ceremony at beginning of, in China, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs and harvest customs compared, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of Dionysus, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Springbok not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squirrels, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sri, Hindoo goddess of crops, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Star, the Morning, i. 238</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stars, their supposed influence on the weather, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stepping or jumping over a woman, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sternberg, Leo, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stettin, harvest customs near, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevenson, Mrs. Matilda Coxe, quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stewart, Balfour, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sticks. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Digging-Sticks'>Digging-sticks</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stiens of Cambodia, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stomach of eater, certain foods forbidden to meet in, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone, magic of heavy, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Age, agriculture in the, i. 79, 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stones fastened to last sheaf, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 138, 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the meeting of the, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stories told as charms, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stout, Professor G. F., 261 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stranger regarded as representative of the corn-spirit, i. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strangers excluded, i. 94, 111, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preferred as human victims, 242;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as representatives of the corn-spirit, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strata of religion and society, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stratification of religion according to types of society, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Straw, the Yule, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Shrovetide Bear used to make geese and hens lay eggs, ii. <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bear at Whittlesey, ii. <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bull, i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man placed on apple-tree, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stubble-cock, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Styria, harvest customs in, i. 133, 134, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sublician bridge at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Substitutes for animal sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Substitutes for a person</q> in China, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Subterranean Zeus, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sudanese negroes respect ravens, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sufferings and death of Dionysus, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sugar-cane cultivated, i. 121, 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suk, the, of British East Africa, i. 118, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumatra, i. 315;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tigers respected in, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summer in Greece rainless, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun, time of sowing determined by observation of the, i. 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Japanese deities of the, 212;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first-fruits offered to the, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savage observation of the, 314;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites instituted by the, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of the, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and moon conjunction of, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; father of Alectrona, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, the, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, moon, and planets, human victims sacrificed to, i. 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Great, title of head chief of the Natchez, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunflower root, ceremony at eating the, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunkalamma, a goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superstitious practices to procure good crops, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supper, the harvest, i. 134, 138. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Harvest-Supper'>Harvest-supper</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Survival of the fittest, doctrine of the, ii. <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutherlandshire, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swabia, harvest customs in, i. 136, 282, 289, 290, 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swallow Song, the Greek, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swans, transmigration of bad poets into, ii. <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweat of famous warriors drunk, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, harvest customs in, i. 149, 230, 280</l>
</lg>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<lg>
<l>Sweet potatoes cultivated in Africa, i. 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in Assam, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in New Britain, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in South America, 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swine, wild, their ravages in the corn, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swine's flesh sacramentally eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Pork'>Pork</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swinging for good crops, i. 101, 103, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Switzerland, harvest customs in, i. 283, 289, 291, 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syleus, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sympathetic magic, i. 102, ii. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, precaution against caterpillars in, ii. <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syrians, their religious attitude to pigs, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>esteemed fish sacred, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Szis, the, of Burma, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabooed village, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taboos observed at the sowing festival among the Kayans, i. 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observed by enchanters, 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>communal, 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>agricultural, 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relating to milk, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observed after the capture of a ground seal, walrus, or whale, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>; funeral rites in, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tail of corn-spirit, 268, 272, 300, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talaings, the, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tales told as charms, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the resurrection of the body in popular, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamara, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tammuz, his death in a mill, i. 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Babylonian month, 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tana, one of the New Hebrides, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanala, the, of Madagascar, i. 9, ii. <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanganyika plateau, the, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tani, a god, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tano, a fetish, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tapir, custom of Indians after killing a, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tapirs, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tapuiyas, the, of Brazil, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarahumare Indians of Mexico, i. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarianos Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taro, charms for growth of, i. 100, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarri Pennu, a Khond goddess, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tauaré Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taungthu, the, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tears of human victim signs of rain, i. 248, 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of oxen as rain-charm, ii. 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teasing animals before killing them, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telephus at Pergamus, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temples dedicated to sharks, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tenimber, island, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teton Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tetzcatlipoca, a Mexican god, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thargelion, an Attic month, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thay, the, of Indo-China, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebes, grave of Dionysus at, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dionysus torn to pieces at, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theocritus on the harvest-home, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thesmophoria, the, i. 14, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chastity of women at the, i. 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thigh, sinew of the, customs and myths as to, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thlinkeet or Tlingit, the, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thompson Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrace, worship of Dionysus in, i. 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Bacchanals of, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modern Carnival customs in, 25 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thresher tied up in last sheaf, i. 134, 147, 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threshers, contests between, i. 147 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 218, 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 253;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pretend to throttle or thresh people on threshing-floor, 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 230;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tied in straw and thrown into water, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threshing, customs at, i. 134, 147 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contests in, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-spirit killed at, 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cow, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -dog, i. 271</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -floor, Demeter at the, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 47;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Triptolemus at Eleusis, 61, 72, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctity of the, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Greece, date of, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Throttling farmer's wife at threshing, pretence of, i. 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thumbs of dead enemies cut off, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thüringen, harvest customs in, i. 147, 222, 232, 276, 290, 291, 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thurn, E. F. im. quoted, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tibetans, the, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger, ghost of, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger's flesh eaten to make men brave, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tigers, ceremonies at killing, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>respected in Sumatra, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kinship of men with, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead in, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tilling of the earth treated as a crime, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timekeepers, natural, i. 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor-laut, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tinneh Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titans attack and kill Dionysus, i. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tjumba, island of, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tlaloc, Mexican god of thunder, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toad, figure of, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of dead man in a, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>

<lg>
<l>Tobacco used as an emetic, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first of season, ceremony at smoking, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todas, their sacrament of buffalo's flesh, ii. <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toepffer, J., quoted, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toerateyas, the, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tofoke, the, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Togoland, i. 130, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tolalaki, the, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomb, sacrifices at, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomori, the, of Central Celebes, i. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Tondi</hi>, soul-stuff, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonga Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings of first-fruits in the, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tongues of birds eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of slain men eaten, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead animals cut out, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of animals worn as amulets, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonsure, the clerical, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tooitonga, the sacred chief of Tonga, ii. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tops, spinning, i. 95, 97, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toradjas, the, of Central Celebes, i. 183, 193, 194, 228, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torch-bearer, the Eleusinian, i. 54, 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torches in relation to Demeter and Persephone, i. 57</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torchlight dance, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>procession at Eleusis, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torres Straits islands, i. 313, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tortoises not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tossing successful reaper, i. 154</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totem, skin-disease supposed to be caused by eating, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrament, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totemic animals, dances in imitation of, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Totemism, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not proved for the Aryans, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Australia and America, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transformation of woman into crocodile, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transmigration of human souls into animals, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>into turtles, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>into bears, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of souls, doctrine of, in ancient India, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Greece, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transmigrations of Buddha, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transubstantiation, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, harvest customs in, i. 221, 276, 278, 280, 285, 295;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs at sowing in, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travancore, i. 8;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom at executions in, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Treasury Islanders, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees in relation to Dionysus, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Triptolemus, i. 37, 38, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>agent of Demeter, i. 54, 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to, 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Threshing-floor at Eleusis, 61, 72, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greek art, 68 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sows seed in Rarian plain, 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the corn-hero, 72 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tristram, H. B., ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troezenians, the, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumpets in rites of Dionysus, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tschwi, the, of West Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tsimshian Indians of British Columbia, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tucanos Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tug of War, i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 110 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tupi Indians of Brazil, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tupinambas, the, i. 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turmeric cultivated, i. 245, 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turtles, killing the sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of human souls into, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tusayan, an ancient province of Arizona, i. 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelfth Day, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twelve Gods, the, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twin, ghost of a, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; girl charged with special duty, ii. <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Two Goddesses, the, i. 56, 59, 73, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Types of animal sacrament, ii. <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Typhon'/>
<l>Typhon, i. 262, 263, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrol, harvest customs in the, i. 163, 224, 273, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tzentales of Mexico, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uaupes River, tribes of the, i. 121</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Underground Zeus, i. 45, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unleavened bread, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Usagara hills, German East Africa, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varro, on the rites of Eleusis, i. 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on killing oxen in Attica, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on sacrifice of goat, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vedijovis, i. 33</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venison, Esquimau rules as to eating, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not brought into hut by door, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reason for not eating, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vera Cruz, the tribes of, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vermin propitiated by farmers, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>images of, made as a protection against them, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verres, C., i. 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vessels, new or specially reserved, to hold new fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special, reserved for eating bear's flesh, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestal virgins, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicarious use of images, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>

<lg>
<l>Victim, human, taken in procession from door to door, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victims, human, treated as divine, i. 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assimilated to gods, 261 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victoria, aborigines of, i. 127</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicuña not eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Village tabooed, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vine in relation to Dionysus, i. 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vintage, first-fruits of, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inaugurated by priests, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Greece, time of, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vintagers and vine-diggers, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virbius and the horse, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil as an enchanter, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgins sacrificed, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitzilipuztli, a Mexican god, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Viza in Thrace, i. 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vizyenos, G. M., i. 25 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volos, the beard of, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vomiting as a religious rite, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vosges Mountains, harvest customs in the, i. 272, 279, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulture, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wa, the Wild, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabondei, the, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wadowe, the, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagogo, the, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wahehe, the, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waheia, the, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wajagga, the, of East Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; warriors, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wakan</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wales, harvest customs in, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallace, A. R., quoted, i. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wamegi, the, of German East Africa, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wanyamwezi, the, i. 118, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>War dance, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Washing as a ceremonial purification, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wataturu, the, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weasels, superstition of farmers as to, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weevils, spared by Esthonian peasants, ii. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weihaiwei, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welsh, Miss, i. 155 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wemba, the, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wends, harvest customs among the, i. 138, 149, 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wermland, harvest customs in, i. 230, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalia, harvest customs in, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 138, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 296, 297</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wetar, island, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whales, ceremonies observed after the slaughter of, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheat-bride, i. 162, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cock, i. 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheat-cow, i. 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -dog, i. 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mallet at threshing, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -man, i. 223</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -mother, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sow, i. 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wolf, i. 273, 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whetham, W. C. D., ii. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White Maize, Goddess of the, i. 261</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ram, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire, the Straw-bear at, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whydah, snakes sacred at, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widows and widowers, disability of, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiedemann, Prof. A., ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wild animals propitiated by hunters, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fig trees, sacred, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fruits and roots, ceremonies at gathering the first of the season, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seeds and roots collected by women, i. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Wa, the, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, R. J., i. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winamwanga, the, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wine, new, offered to Liber, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnowing done by women, i. 117, 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -basket, image of snake in, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -fan, an emblem of Dionysus, i. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as cradle, 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used to scatter ashes of human victims, 260, 262</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter, name given to man who cuts the last sheaf, i. 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name of harvest-supper, 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of Dionysus, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; solstice, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch, burning the Old, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witchcraft, protection against, i. 156, ii. <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolf, corn-spirit as, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stuffed, carried about, i. 275;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at killing a, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Wolves'>Wolves</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolf's heart eaten, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; skin, man clad in, i. 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfish Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wollaroi, the, of New South Wales, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wolves'/>
<l>Wolves, sacrifices offered to, ii. <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transmigration of sinners into, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woman's part in primitive agriculture, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women, influence of corn-spirit on, i. 168;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>who have died in childbed, attempts to deceive their ghosts, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to have no soul, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; milk cows, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; swear by the Pleiades, i. 311</l>
</lg>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<lg>
<l>Women's race at harvest, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood-spirits in goat form, ii. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; woman, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woodford, C. M., ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Words, special, used by reapers, i. 193</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worm, transmigration of sinner into, ii. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worms, souls of dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worship of cattle, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of animals, two forms of the, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of snake, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worshipful animal killed once a year, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Wrach</foreign> (Hag), name given to last corn cut in Wales, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wreath of corn, i. 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wren, hunting the, ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called the king of birds, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superstitions as to the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wrestling, i. 98, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Würtemburg, harvest customs in, i. 286, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xanthicus, a Macedonian month, i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophon, on Triptolemus, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xochiquetzal, a Mexican goddess, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yabim, the, of German New Guinea, i. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 228, ii. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yams, charm for growth of, i. 100, 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in Africa, 119;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in New Britain, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivated in South America, 120, 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dug by Australian aborigines, 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies at eating the new, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of the new, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Tonga, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yang-Seri, prayers to, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yaos, the, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Year, beginning of, marked by appearance of Pleiades, i. 309, 310, 312, 313, 314, 315;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divided into thirteen moons, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yellow Demeter, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yezo or Yesso, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yombe, the, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorkshire, harvest customs in, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yoruba negroes, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Youngest person cuts the last corn, i. 158, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yuchi Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Yule'/>
<l>Yule Boar, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Goat, the, ii. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ram, the, ii. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; straw, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yuracares Indians of Bolivia, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zabern in Alsace, harvest custom at, i. 297</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zagreus, i. 12</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zambesi, tribes of the Upper, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; region, Caffres of the, ii. <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zanzibar, custom at sowing in, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zaparo Indians, the, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zapotecs of Mexico, their harvest customs, i. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus, his intrigue with Persephone, i. 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>father of Dionysus by Demeter, 12, 14, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his intrigue with Demeter, 66;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>surnamed Underground, 45, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Demeter, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>; marriage of, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Hercules, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Laphystian, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Polieus, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sosipolis, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Subterranean, i. 66, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Fly-catcher, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulu king, dance of the, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulus, the, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women's part in agriculture among the, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their festival of first-fruits, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their inoculation, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zuni Indians, their custom of killing sacred turtles, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zurich, harvest customs in the canton of, i. 291, 297</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
